The Project Gutenberg EBook of Caesar: A Sketch, by James Anthony Froude

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Caesar: A Sketch

Author: James Anthony Froude

Release Date: July, 2005 [EBook #8425]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 9, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAESAR: A SKETCH ***




Produced by Eric Eldred, Robert Connal
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




[Illustration: Julius Caesar]


CAESAR

_A SKETCH_




BY

JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, M.A.

FORMERLY FELLOW OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD




                   _"Pardon, gentles all
  The flat unraised spirit that hath dared
  On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
  So great an object."_

  --SHAKESPEARE, Henry V.




PREFACE.


I have called this work a "sketch" because the materials do not exist for
a portrait which shall be at once authentic and complete. The original
authorities which are now extant for the life of Caesar are his own
writings, the speeches and letters of Cicero, the eighth book of the
"Commentaries" on the wars in Gaul and the history of the Alexandrian war,
by Aulus Hirtius, the accounts of the African war and of the war in Spain,
composed by persons who were unquestionably present in those two
campaigns. To these must be added the "Leges Juliae" which are preserved
in the Corpus Juris Civilis. Sallust contributes a speech, and Catullus a
poem. A few hints can be gathered from the Epitome of Livy and the
fragments of Varro; and here the contemporary sources which can be
entirely depended upon are brought to an end.

The secondary group of authorities from which the popular histories of the
time have been chiefly taken are Appian, Plutarch, Suetonius, and Dion
Cassius. Of these the first three were divided from the period which they
describe by nearly a century and a half, Dion Cassius by more than two
centuries. They had means of knowledge which no longer exist--the
writings, for instance, of Asinius Pollio, who was one of Caesar's
officers. But Asinius Pollio's accounts of Caesar's actions, as reported
by Appian, cannot always be reconciled with the Commentaries; and all
these four writers relate incidents as facts which are sometimes
demonstrably false. Suetonius is apparently the most trustworthy. His
narrative, like those of his contemporaries, was colored by tradition. His
biographies of the earlier Caesars betray the same spirit of animosity
against them which taints the credibility of Tacitus, and prevailed for so
many years in aristocratic Roman society. But Suetonius shows nevertheless
an effort at veracity, an antiquarian curiosity and diligence, and a
serious anxiety to tell his story impartially. Suetonius, in the absence
of evidence direct or presumptive to the contrary, I have felt myself able
to follow. The other three writers I have trusted only when I have found
them partially confirmed by evidence which is better to be relied upon.

The picture which I have drawn will thus be found deficient in many
details which have passed into general acceptance, and I have been unable
to claim for it a higher title than that of an outline drawing.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

Free Constitutions and Imperial Tendencies.--Instructiveness of Roman
History.--Character of Historical Epochs.--The Age of Caesar.--Spiritual
State of Rome.--Contrasts between Ancient and Modern Civilization.


CHAPTER II.

The Roman Constitution.--Moral Character of the Romans.--Roman Religion.--
Morality and Intellect.--Expansion of Roman Power.--The Senate.--Roman
Slavery.--Effects of Intercourse with Greece.--Patrician Degeneracy.--The
Roman Noble.--Influence of Wealth.--Beginnings of Discontent.


CHAPTER III.

Tiberius Gracchus.--Decay of the Italian Yeomanry.--Agrarian Law.--Success
and Murder of Gracchus.--Land Commission.--Caius Gracchus.--Transfer of
Judicial Functions from the Senate to the Equites.--Sempronian Laws.--Free
Grants of Corn.--Plans for Extension of the Franchise.--New Colonies.--
Reaction.--Murder of Caius Gracchus


CHAPTER IV.

Victory of the Optimates.--The Moors.--History of Jugurtha.--The Senate
corrupted.--Jugurthine War.--Defeat of the Romans.--Jugurtha comes to
Rome.--Popular Agitation.--The War renewed.--Roman Defeats in Africa and
Gaul.--Caecilius Metellus and Caius Marius.--Marriage of Marius.--The
Caesars.--Marius Consul.--First Notice of Sylla.--Capture and Death of
Jugurtha


CHAPTER V.

Birth of Cicero.--The Cimbri and Teutons.--German Immigration into Gaul.--
Great Defeat of the Romans on the Rhone.--Wanderings of the Cimbri.--
Attempted Invasion of Italy.--Battle of Aix.--Destruction of the
Teutons.--Defeat of the Cimbri on the Po.--Reform in the Roman Army.--
Popular Disturbances in Rome.--Murder of Memmius.--Murder of Saturninus
and Glaucia


CHAPTER VI.

Birth and Childhood of Julius Caesar.--Italian Franchise.--Discontent of
the Italians.--Action of the Land Laws.--The Social War.--Partial
Concessions.--Sylla and Marius.--Mithridates of Pontus.--First Mission of
Sylla into Asia.


CHAPTER VII.

War with Mithridates.--Massacre of Italians in Asia.--Invasion of
Greece.--Impotence and Corruption of the Senate.--End of the Social War.--
Sylla appointed to the Asiatic Command.--The Assembly transfer the Command
to Marius.--Sylla marches on Rome.--Flight of Marius.--Change of the
Constitution.--Sylla sails for the East.--Four Years' Absence.--Defeat of
Mithridates.--Contemporary Incidents at Rome.--Counter Revolution.--
Consulship of Cinna.--Return of Marius.--Capitulation of Rome.--Massacre
of Patricians and Equites.--Triumph of Democracy.


CHAPTER VIII.

The Young Caesar.--Connection with Marius.--Intimacy with the Ciceros.--
Marriage of Caesar with the Daughter of Cinna.--Sertorius.--Death of
Cinna.--Consulships of Norbanus and Scipio.--Sylla's Return.--First
Appearance of Pompey.--Civil War.--Victory of Sylla.--The Dictatorship and
the Proscription.--Destruction of the Popular Party and Murder of the
Popular Leaders.--General Character of Aristocratic Revolutions.--The
Constitution remodelled.--Concentration of Power in the Senate.--Sylla's
General Policy.--The Army.--Flight of Sertorius to Spain.--Pompey and
Sylla.--Caesar refuses to divorce his Wife at Sylla's Order.--Danger of
Caesar.--His Pardon.--Growing Consequence of Cicero.--Defence of
Roscius.--Sylla's Abdication and Death


CHAPTER IX.

Sertorius in Spain.--Warning of Cicero to the Patricians.--Leading
Aristocrats.--Caesar with the Army in the East.--Nicomedes of Bithynia.--
The Bithynian Scandal.--Conspiracy of Lepidus.--Caesar returns to Rome.--
Defeat of Lepidus.--Prosecution of Dolabella.--Caesar taken by Pirates.--
Senatorial Corruption.--Universal Disorder.--Civil War in Spain.--Growth
of Mediterranean Piracy.--Connivance of the Senate.--Provincial
Administration.--Verres in Sicily.--Prosecuted by Cicero.--Second War
with Mithridates.--First Success of Lucullus.--Failure of Lucullus, and
the Cause of it.--Avarice of Roman Commanders.--The Gladiators.--The
Servile War.--Results of the Change in the Constitution introduced by
Sylla


CHAPTER X.

Caesar Military Tribune.--Becomes known as a Speaker.--Is made Quaestor.--
Speech at his Aunt's Funeral.--Consulship of Pompey and Crassus.--Caesar
marries Pompey's Cousin.--Mission to Spain.--Restoration of the Powers of
the Tribunes.--The Equites and the Senate.--The Pirates.--Food Supplies
cut off from Rome.--The Gabinian Law.--Resistance of the Patricians.--
Suppression of the Pirates by Pompey.--The Manilian Law.--Speech of
Cicero.--Recall of Lucullus.--Pompey sent to command in Asia.--Defeat and
Death of Mithridates.--Conquest of Asia by Pompey


CHAPTER XI.

History of Catiline.--A Candidate for the Consulship.--Catiline and
Cicero.--Cicero chosen Consul.--Attaches Himself to the Senatorial
Party.--Caesar elected Aedile.--Conducts an Inquiry into the Syllan
Proscriptions.--Prosecution of Rabirius.--Caesar becomes Pontifex
Maximus--and Praetor.--Cicero's Conduct as Consul.--Proposed Agrarian
Law.--Resisted by Cicero.--Catiline again stands for the Consulship.--
Violent Language in the Senate.--Threatened Revolution.--Catiline again
defeated.--The Conspiracy.--Warnings sent to Cicero.--Meeting at
Catiline's House.--Speech of Cicero in the Senate.--Cataline joins an Army
of Insurrection in Etruria.--His Fellow-conspirators.--Correspondence with
the Allobroges.--Letters read in the Senate.--The Conspirators seized.--
Debate upon their Fate.--Speech of Caesar.--Caesar on a Future State.--
Speech of Cato--and of Cicero.--The Conspirators executed untried.--Death
of Catiline.


CHAPTER XII.

Preparations for the Return of Pompey.--Scene in the Forum.--Cato and
Metellus.--Caesar suspended from the Praetorship.--Caesar supports
Pompey.--Scandals against Caesar's Private Life.--General Character of
them.--Festival of the Bona Dea.--Publius Clodius enters Caesar's House
dressed as a Woman.--Prosecution and Trial of Clodius.--His Acquittal, and
the Reason of it.--Successes of Caesar as Propraetor in Spain.--Conquest
of Lusitania.--Return of Pompey to Italy.--First Speech in the Senate.--
Precarious Position of Cicero.--Cato and the Equites.--Caesar elected
Consul.--Revival of the Democratic Party.--Anticipated Agrarian Law.--
Uneasiness of Cicero.


CHAPTER XIII.

The Consulship of Caesar.--Character of his Intended Legislation.--The
Land Act first proposed in the Senate.--Violent Opposition.--Caesar
appeals to the Assembly.--Interference of the Second Consul Bibulus.--The
Land Act submitted to the People.--Pompey and Crassus support it.--Bibulus
interposes, but without Success.--The Act carried--and other Laws.--The
Senate no longer being Consulted.--General Purpose of the Leges Juliae.--
Caesar appointed to Command in Gaul for Five Years.--His Object in
accepting that Province.--Condition of Gaul, and the Dangers to be
apprehended from it.--Alliance of Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus.--The
Dynasts.--Indignation of the Aristocracy.--Threats to repeal Caesar's
Laws.--Necessity of Controlling Cicero and Cato.--Clodius is made
Tribune.--Prosecution of Cicero for Illegal Acts when Consul.--Cicero's
Friends forsake him.--He flies, and is banished.


CHAPTER XIV.

Caesar's Military Narrative.--Divisions of Gaul.--Distribution of
Population.--The Celts.--Degree of Civilization.--Tribal System.--The
Druids.--The AEdui and the Sequani.--Roman and German Parties.--Intended
Migration of the Helvetii.--Composition of Caesar's Army.--He goes to
Gaul.--Checks the Helvetii.--Returns to Italy for Larger Forces.--The
Helvetii on the Saone.--Defeated, and sent back to Switzerland.--Invasion
of Gaul by Ariovistus.--Caesar invites him to a Conference.--He refuses.--
Alarm in the Roman Army.--Caesar marches against Ariovistus.--Interview
between them.--Treachery of the Roman Senate.--Great Battle at Colmar.--
Defeat and Annihilation of the Germans.--End of the First Campaign.--
Confederacy among the Belgae.--Battle on the Aisne.--War with the
Nervii.--Battle of Maubeuge.--Capture of Namur.--The Belgae conquered.--
Submission of Brittany.--End of the Second Campaign.


CHAPTER XV.

Cicero and Clodius.--Position and Character of Clodius.--Cato sent to
Cyprus.--Attempted Recall of Cicero defeated by Clodius.--Fight in the
Forum.--Pardon and Return of Cicero.--Moderate Speech to the People.--
Violence in the Senate.--Abuse of Piso and Gabinius.--Coldness of the
Senate toward Cicero.--Restoration of Cicero's House.--Interfered with by
Clodius.--Factions of Clodius and Milo.--Ptolemy Auletes expelled by his
Subjects.--Appeals to Rome for Help.--Alexandrian Envoys assassinated.--
Clodius elected aedile.--Fight in the Forum.--Parties in Rome.--Situation
of Cicero.--Rally of the Aristocracy.--Attempt to repeal the Leges
Juliae.--Conference at Lucca.--Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus.--Cicero
deserts the Senate.--Explains his Motives.--Confirmation of the Ordinances
of Lucca.--Pompey and Crassus Consuls.--Caesar's Command prolonged for
Five Additional Years.--Rejoicings in Rome.--Spectacle in the
Amphitheater.


CHAPTER XVI.

Revolt of the Veneti.--Fleet prepared in the Loire.--Sea-fight at
Quiberon.--Reduction of Normandy and of Aquitaine.--Complete Conquest of
Gaul.--Fresh Arrival of Germans over the Lower Rhine.--Caesar orders them
to retire, and promises them Lands elsewhere.--They refuse to go--and are
destroyed.--Bridge over the Rhine.--Caesar invades Germany.--Returns after
a Short Inroad.--First Expedition into Britain.--Caesar lands at Deal, or
Walmer.--Storm and Injury to the Fleet.--Approach of the Equinox.--
Further Prosecution of the Enterprise postponed till the following Year.--
Caesar goes to Italy for the Winter.--Large Naval Preparations.--Return of
Spring.--Alarm on the Moselle.--Fleet collects at Boulogne.--Caesar sails
for Britain a Second Time.--Lands at Deal.--Second and more Destructive
Storm.--Ships repaired, and placed out of Danger.--Caesar marches through
Kent.--Crosses the Thames, and reaches St. Albans.--Goes no further, and
returns to Gaul.--Object of the Invasion of Britain.--Description of the
Country and People.


CHAPTER XVII.

Distribution of the Legions after the Return from Britain.--Conspiracy
among the Gallic Chiefs.--Rising of the Eburones.--Destruction of Sabinus,
and a Division of the Roman Army.--Danger of Quintus Cicero.--Relieved by
Caesar in Person.--General Disturbance.--Labienus attacked at
Lavacherie.--Defeats and kills Induciomarus.--Second Conquest of the
Belgae.--Caesar again crosses the Rhine.--Quintus Cicero in Danger a
Second Time.--Courage of a Roman Officer.--Punishment of the Revolted
Chiefs.--Execution of Acco.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Correspondence of Cicero with Caesar.--Intimacy with Pompey and Crassus.--
Attacks on Piso and Gabinius.---Cicero compelled to defend Gabinius--and
Vatinius.--Dissatisfaction with his Position.--Corruption at the Consular
Elections.--Public Scandal.--Caesar and Pompey.--Deaths of Aurelia and
Julia.--Catastrophe in the East.--Overthrow and Death of Crassus.--
Intrigue to detach Pompey from Caesar.---Milo a Candidate for the
Consulship.--Murder of Clodius.--Burning of the Senate-house.--Trial and
Exile of Milo.--Fresh Engagements with Caesar.--Promise of the Consulship
at the End of his Term in Gaul.


CHAPTER XIX.

Last Revolt of Gaul.--Massacre of Romans at Gien.--Vercingetorix.--Effect
on the Celts of the Disturbances at Rome.--Caesar crosses the Cevennes.--
Defeats the Arverni.--Joins his Army on the Seine.--Takes Gien, Nevers,
and Bourges.--Fails at Gergovia.--Rapid March to Sens.--Labienus at
Paris.--Battle of the Vingeanne.--Siege of Alesia.--Caesar's Double
Lines.--Arrival of the Relieving Army of Gauls.--First Battle on the
Plain.--Second Battle.--Great Defeat of the Gauls.--Surrender of
Alesia.--Campaign against the Carnutes and the Bellovaci.--Rising on the
Dordogne.--Capture of Uxellodunum.--Caesar at Arras.--Completion of the
Conquest.


CHAPTER XX.

Bibulus in Syria.--Approaching Term of Caesar's Government.--Threats of
Impeachment.--Caesar to be Consul or not to be Consul?--Caesar's Political
Ambition.--Hatred felt toward him by the Aristocracy.--Two Legions taken
from him on Pretense of Service against the Parthians.--Caesar to be
recalled before the Expiration of his Government.--Senatorial Intrigues.--
Curio deserts the Senate.--Labienus deserts Caesar.--Cicero in Cilicia.--
Returns to Rome.--Pompey determined on War.--Cicero's Uncertainties.--
Resolution of the Senate and Consuls.--Caesar recalled.--Alarm in Rome.--
Alternative Schemes.--Letters of Cicero.--Caesar's Crime in the Eyes of
the Optimates.


CHAPTER XXI.

Caesar appeals to his Army.--The Tribunes join him at Rimini.--Panic and
Flight of the Senate.--Incapacity of Pompey.--Fresh Negotiations.--
Advance of Caesar.--The Country Districts refuse to arm against him.--
Capture of Corfinium.--Release of the Prisoners.--Offers of Caesar.--
Continued Hesitation of Cicero.--Advises Pompey to make Peace.--Pompey,
with the Senate and Consuls, flies to Greece.--Cicero's Reflections.--
Pompey to be another Sylla.--Caesar Mortal, and may die by more Means than
one.


CHAPTER XXII.

Pompey's Army in Spain.--Caesar at Rome.--Departure for Spain.--Marseilles
refuses to receive him.--Siege of Marseilles.--Defeat of Pompey's
Lieutenants at Lerida.--The whole Army made Prisoners.--Surrender of
Varro.--Marseilles taken.--Defeat of Curio by King Juba in Africa.--
Caesar named Dictator.--Confusion in Rome.--Caesar at Brindisi.--Crosses
to Greece in Midwinter.--Again offers Peace.--Pompey's Fleet in the
Adriatic.--Death of Bibulus.--Failure of Negotiations.--Caelius and Milo
killed.--Arrival of Antony in Greece with the Second Division of Caesar's
Army.--Siege of Durazzo.--Defeat and Retreat of Caesar.--The Senate and
Pompey.--Pursuit of Caesar.--Battle of Pharsalia.--Flight of Pompey.--The
Camp taken.--Complete Overthrow of the Senatorial Faction.--Cicero on the
Situation once more.


CHAPTER XXIII.

Pompey flies to Egypt.--State of Parties in Egypt.--Murder of Pompey.--His
Character.--Caesar follows him to Alexandria.--Rising in the City.--
Caesar besieged in the Palace.--Desperate Fighting.--Arrival of
Mithridates of Pergamus.--Battle near Cairo, and Death of the Young
Ptolemy.--Cleopatra.--The Detention of Caesar enables the Optimates to
rally.--Ill Conduct of Caesar's Officers in Spain.--War with Pharnaces.--
Battle of Zela, and Settlement of Asia Minor.


CHAPTER XXIV.

The Aristocracy raise an Army in Africa.--Supported by Juba.--Pharsalia
not to end the War.--Caesar again in Rome.--Restores Order.--Mutiny in
Caesar's Army.--The Mutineers submit.--Caesar lands in Africa.--
Difficulties of the Campaign.--Battle of Thapsus.--No more Pardons.--
Afranius and Faustus Sylla put to Death.--Cato kills himself at Utica.--
Scipio killed.--Juba and Petreius die on each other's Swords.--A Scene in
Caesar's Camp.


CHAPTER XXV.

Rejoicings in Rome.--Caesar Dictator for the Year.--Reforms the
Constitution.--Reforms the Calendar--and the Criminal Law.--
Dissatisfaction of Cicero.--Last Efforts in Spain of Labienus and the
Young Pompeys.--Caesar goes thither in Person, accompanied by Octavius.--
Caesar's Last Battle at Munda.--Death of Labienus.--Capture of Cordova.--
Close of the Civil War.--General Reflections.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Caesar once more in Rome.--General Amnesty.--The Surviving Optimates
pretend to submit.--Increase in the Number of Senators.--Introduction of
Foreigners.--New Colonies.--Carthage.--Corinth.--Sumptuary Regulations.--
Digest of the Law.--Intended Parthian War.--Honors heaped on Caesar.--The
Object of them.--Caesar's Indifference.--Some Consolations.--Hears of
Conspiracies, but disregards them.--Speculations of Cicero in the Last
Stage of the War.--Speech in the Senate.--A Contrast, and the Meaning of
it.--The Kingship.--Antony offers Caesar the Crown, which Caesar
refuses.--The Assassins.--Who they were.--Brutus and Cassius.--Two
Officers of Caesar's among them.--Warnings.--Meeting of the
Conspirators.--Caesar's Last Evening.--The Ides of March.--The
Senate-house.--Caesar killed.


CHAPTER XXVII.

Consternation in Rome.--The Conspirators in the Capitol.--Unforeseen
Difficulties.--Speech of Cicero.--Caesar's Funeral.--Speech of Antony.--
Fury of the People.--The Funeral Pile in the Forum.--The King is dead, but
the Monarchy survives.--Fruitlessness of the Murder.--Octavius and
Antony.--Union of Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus.--Proscription of the
Assassins.--Philippi, and the end of Brutus and Cassius.--Death of
Cicero.--His Character.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

General Remarks on Caesar.--Mythological Tendencies.--Supposed Profligacy
of Caesar.--Nature of the Evidence.--Servilia.--Cleopatra.--Personal
Appearance of Caesar.--His Manners in Private Life.--Considerations upon
him as a Politician, a Soldier, and a Man of Letters.--Practical Justice
his Chief Aim as a Politician.--Universality of Military Genius.--Devotion
of his Army to him, how deserved.--Art of reconciling Conquered
Peoples.--General Scrupulousness and Leniency.--Oratorical and Literary
Style.--Cicero's Description of it.--His Lost Works.--Cato's Judgment on
the Civil War.--How Caesar should be estimated.--Legend of Charles V.--
Spiritual Condition of the Age in which Caesar lived.--His Work on Earth
to establish Order and Good Government, to make possible the Introduction
of Christianity.--A Parallel.






CAESAR: A SKETCH



CHAPTER I.


To the student of political history, and to the English student above all
others, the conversion of the Roman Republic into a military empire
commands a peculiar interest. Notwithstanding many differences, the
English and the Romans essentially resemble one another. The early Romans
possessed the faculty of self-government beyond any people of whom we have
historical knowledge, with the one exception of ourselves. In virtue of
their temporal freedom, they became the most powerful nation in the known
world; and their liberties perished only when Rome became the mistress of
conquered races, to whom she was unable or unwilling to extend her
privileges. If England was similarly supreme, if all rival powers were
eclipsed by her or laid under her feet, the Imperial tendencies, which are
as strongly marked in us as our love of liberty, might lead us over the
same course to the same end. If there be one lesson which history clearly
teaches, it is this, that free nations cannot govern subject provinces. If
they are unable or unwilling to admit their dependencies to share their
own constitution, the constitution itself will fall in pieces from mere
incompetence for its duties.

We talk often foolishly of the necessities of things, and we blame
circumstances for the consequences of our own follies and vices; but there
are faults which are not faults of will, but faults of mere inadequacy to
some unforeseen position. Human nature is equal to much, but not to
everything. It can rise to altitudes where it is alike unable to sustain
itself or to retire from them to a safer elevation. Yet when the field is
open it pushes forward, and moderation in the pursuit of greatness is
never learnt and never will be learnt. Men of genius are governed by their
instinct; they follow where instinct leads them; and the public life of a
nation is but the life of successive generations of statesmen, whose
horizon is bounded, and who act from day to day as immediate interests
suggest. The popular leader of the hour sees some present difficulty or
present opportunity of distinction. He deals with each question as it
arises, leaving future consequences to those who are to come after him.
The situation changes from period to period, and tendencies are generated
with an accelerating force, which, when once established, can never be
reversed. When the control of reason is once removed, the catastrophe is
no longer distant, and then nations, like all organized creations, all
forms of life, from the meanest flower to the highest human institution,
pass through the inevitably recurring stages of growth and transformation
and decay. A commonwealth, says Cicero, ought to be immortal, and for ever
to renew its youth. Yet commonwealths have proved as unenduring as any
other natural object:

                    Everything that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  And this huge state presenteth nought but shows,
  Whereon the stars in silent influence comment.

Nevertheless, "as the heavens are high above the earth, so is wisdom above
folly." Goethe compares life to a game at whist, where the cards are dealt
out by destiny, and the rules of the game are fixed: subject to these
conditions, the players are left to win or lose, according to their skill
or want of skill. The life of a nation, like the life of a man, may be
prolonged in honor into the fulness of its time, or it may perish
prematurely, for want of guidance, by violence or internal disorders. And
thus the history of national revolutions is to statesmanship what the
pathology of disease is to the art of medicine. The physician cannot
arrest the coming on of age. Where disease has laid hold upon the
constitution he cannot expel it. But he may check the progress of the evil
if he can recognize the symptoms in time. He can save life at the cost of
an unsound limb. He can tell us how to preserve our health when we have
it; he can warn us of the conditions under which particular disorders will
have us at disadvantage. And so with nations: amidst the endless variety
of circumstances there are constant phenomena which give notice of
approaching danger; there are courses of action which have uniformly
produced the same results; and the wise politicians are those who have
learnt from experience the real tendencies of things, unmisled by
superficial differences, who can shun the rocks where others have been
wrecked, or from foresight of what is coming can be cool when the peril is
upon them.

For these reasons, the fall of the Roman Republic is exceptionally
instructive to us. A constitutional government the most enduring and the
most powerful that ever existed was put on its trial, and found wanting.
We see it in its growth; we see the causes which undermined its strength.
We see attempts to check the growing mischief fail, and we see why they
failed. And we see, finally, when nothing seemed so likely as complete
dissolution, the whole system changed by a violent operation, and the
dying patient's life protracted for further centuries of power and
usefulness.

Again, irrespective of the direct teaching which we may gather from them,
particular epochs in history have the charm for us which dramas have--
periods when the great actors on the stage of life stand before us with
the distinctness with which they appear in the creations of a poet. There
have not been many such periods; for to see the past, it is not enough for
us to be able to look at it through the eyes of contemporaries; these
contemporaries themselves must have been parties to the scenes which they
describe. They must have had full opportunities of knowledge. They must
have had eyes which could see things in their true proportions. They must
have had, in addition, the rare literary powers which can convey to others
through the medium of language an exact picture of their own minds; and
such happy combinations occur but occasionally in thousands of years.
Generation after generation passes by, and is crumbled into sand as rocks
are crumbled by the sea. Each brought with it its heroes and its villains,
its triumphs and its sorrows; but the history is formless legend,
incredible and unintelligible; the figures of the actors are indistinct as
the rude ballad or ruder inscription, which may be the only authentic
record of them. We do not see the men and women, we see only the outlines
of them which have been woven into tradition as they appeared to the loves
or hatreds of passionate admirers or enemies. Of such times we know
nothing, save the broad results as they are measured from century to
century, with here and there some indestructible pebble, some law, some
fragment of remarkable poetry which has resisted decomposition. These
periods are the proper subject of the philosophic historian, and to him we
leave them. But there are others, a few, at which intellectual activity
was as great as it is now, with its written records surviving, in which
the passions, the opinions, the ambitions of the age are all before us,
where the actors in the great drama speak their own thoughts in their own
words, where we hear their enemies denounce them and their friends praise
them; where we are ourselves plunged amidst the hopes and fears of the
hour, to feel the conflicting emotions and to sympathize in the struggles
which again seem to live: and here philosophy is at fault. Philosophy,
when we are face to face with real men, is as powerless as over the Iliad
or King Lear. The overmastering human interest transcends explanation. We
do not sit in judgment on the right or the wrong; we do not seek out
causes to account for what takes place, feeling too conscious of the
inadequacy of our analysis. We see human beings possessed by different
impulses, and working out a pre-ordained result, as the subtle forces
drive each along the path marked out for him; and history becomes the more
impressive to us where it least immediately instructs.

With such vividness, with such transparent clearness, the age stands
before us of Cato and Pompey, of Cicero and Julius Caesar; the more
distinctly because it was an age in so many ways the counterpart of our
own, the blossoming period of the old civilization, when the intellect was
trained to the highest point which it could reach, and on the great
subjects of human interest, on morals and politics, on poetry and art,
even on religion itself and the speculative problems of life, men thought
as we think, doubted where we doubt, argued as we argue, aspired and
struggled after the same objects. It was an age of material progress and
material civilization; an age of civil liberty and intellectual culture;
an age of pamphlets and epigrams, of salons and of dinner-parties, of
senatorial majorities and electoral corruption. The highest offices of
state were open in theory to the meanest citizen; they were confined, in
fact, to those who had the longest purses, or the most ready use of the
tongue on popular platforms. Distinctions of birth had been exchanged for
distinctions of wealth. The struggles between plebeians and patricians for
equality of privilege were over, and a new division had been formed
between the party of property and a party who desired a change in the
structure of society. The free cultivators were disappearing from the
soil. Italy was being absorbed into vast estates, held by a few favored
families and cultivated by slaves, while the old agricultural population
was driven off the land, and was crowded into towns. The rich were
extravagant, for life had ceased to have practical interest, except for
its material pleasures; the occupation of the higher classes was to obtain
money without labor, and to spend it in idle enjoyment. Patriotism
survived on the lips, but patriotism meant the ascendency of the party
which would maintain the existing order of things, or would overthrow it
for a more equal distribution of the good things which alone were valued.
Religion, once the foundation of the laws and rule of personal conduct,
had subsided into opinion. The educated, in their hearts, disbelieved it.
Temples were still built with increasing splendor; the established forms
were scrupulously observed. Public men spoke conventionally of Providence,
that they might throw on their opponents the odium of impiety; but of
genuine belief that life had any serious meaning, there was none remaining
beyond the circle of the silent, patient, ignorant multitude. The whole
spiritual atmosphere was saturated with cant--cant moral, cant political,
cant religious; an affectation of high principle which had ceased to touch
the conduct, and flowed on in an increasing volume of insincere and unreal
speech. The truest thinkers were those who, like Lucretius, spoke frankly
out their real convictions, declared that Providence was a dream, and that
man and the world he lived in were material phenomena, generated by
natural forces out of cosmic atoms, and into atoms to be again resolved.

Tendencies now in operation may a few generations hence land modern
society in similar conclusions, unless other convictions revive meanwhile
and get the mastery of them; of which possibility no more need be said
than this, that unless there be such a revival in some shape or other, the
forces, whatever they be, which control the forms in which human things
adjust themselves, will make an end again, as they made an end before, of
what are called free institutions. Popular forms of government are
possible only when individual men can govern their own lives on moral
principles, and when duty is of more importance than pleasure, and justice
than material expediency. Rome at any rate had grown ripe for judgment.
The shape which the judgment assumed was due perhaps, in a measure, to a
condition which has no longer a parallel among us. The men and women by
whom the hard work of the world was done were chiefly slaves, and those
who constitute the driving force of revolutions in modern Europe lay then
outside society, unable and perhaps uncaring to affect its fate. No change
then possible would much influence the prospects of the unhappy bondsmen.
The triumph of the party of the constitution would bring no liberty to
them. That their masters should fall like themselves under the authority
of a higher master could not much distress them. Their sympathies, if they
had any, would go with those nearest their own rank, the emancipated
slaves and the sons of those who were emancipated; and they, and the poor
free citizens everywhere, were to a man on the side which was considered
and was called the side of "the people," and was, in fact, the side of
despotism.




CHAPTER II.


The Roman Constitution had grown out of the character of the Roman nation.
It was popular in form beyond all constitutions of which there is any
record in history. The citizens assembled in the Comitia were the
sovereign authority in the State, and they exercised their power
immediately and not by representatives. The executive magistrates were
chosen annually. The assembly was the supreme Court of Appeal; and without
its sanction no freeman could be lawfully put to death. In the assembly
also was the supreme power of legislation. Any consul, any praetor, any
tribune, might propose a law from the Rostra to the people. The people if
it pleased them might accept such law, and senators and public officers
might be sworn to obey it under pains of treason. As a check on
precipitate resolutions, a single consul or a single tribune might
interpose his veto. But the veto was binding only so long as the year of
office continued. If the people were in earnest, submission to their
wishes could be made a condition at the next election, and thus no
constitutional means existed of resisting them when these wishes showed
themselves.

In normal times the Senate was allowed the privilege of preconsidering
intended acts of legislation, and refusing to recommend them if
inexpedient, but the privilege was only converted into a right after
violent convulsions, and was never able to maintain itself. That under
such a system the functions of government could have been carried on at
all was due entirely to the habits of self-restraint which the Romans had
engraved into their nature. They were called a nation of kings, kings over
their own appetites, passions, and inclinations. They were not
imaginative, they were not intellectual; they had little national poetry,
little art, little philosophy. They were moral and practical. In these two
directions the force that was in them entirely ran. They were free
politically, because freedom meant to them not freedom to do as they
pleased, but freedom to do what was right; and every citizen, before he
arrived at his civil privileges, had been schooled in the discipline of
obedience. Each head of a household was absolute master of it, master over
his children and servants, even to the extent of life and death. What the
father was to the family, the gods were to the whole people, the awful
lords and rulers at whose pleasure they lived and breathed. Unlike the
Greeks, the reverential Romans invented no idle legends about the
supernatural world. The gods to them were the guardians of the State,
whose will in all things they were bound to seek and to obey. The forms in
which they endeavored to learn what that will might be were childish or
childlike. They looked to signs in the sky, to thunder-storms and comets
and shooting stars. Birds, winged messengers, as they thought them,
between earth and heaven, were celestial indicators of the gods' commands.
But omens and auguries were but the outward symbols, and the Romans, like
all serious peoples, went to their own hearts for their real guidance.
They had a unique religious peculiarity, to which no race of men has
produced anything like. They did not embody the elemental forces in
personal forms; they did not fashion a theology out of the movements of
the sun and stars or the changes of the seasons. Traces may be found among
them of cosmic traditions and superstitions, which were common to all the
world; but they added of their own this especial feature: that they built
temples and offered sacrifices to the highest human excellences, to
"Valor," to "Truth," to "Good Faith," to "Modesty," to "Charity," to
"Concord." In these qualities lay all that raised man above the animals
with which he had so much in common. In them, therefore, were to be found
the link which connected him with the divine nature, and moral qualities
were regarded as divine influences which gave his life its meaning and its
worth. The "Virtues" were elevated into beings to whom disobedience could
be punished as a crime, and the superstitious fears which run so often
into mischievous idolatries were enlisted with conscience in the direct
service of right action.

On the same principle the Romans chose the heroes and heroines of their
national history. The Manlii and Valerii were patterns of courage, the
Lucretias and Virginias of purity, the Decii and Curtii of patriotic
devotion, the Reguli and Fabricii of stainless truthfulness. On the same
principle, too, they had a public officer whose functions resembled those
of the Church courts in mediaeval Europe, a Censor Morum, an inquisitor
who might examine into the habits of private families, rebuke
extravagance, check luxury, punish vice and self-indulgence, nay, who
could remove from the Senate, the great council of elders, persons whose
moral conduct was a reproach to a body on whose reputation no shadow could
be allowed to rest.

Such the Romans were in the day when their dominion had not extended
beyond the limits of Italy; and because they were such they were able to
prosper under a constitution which to modern experience would promise only
the most hopeless confusion.

Morality thus engrained in the national character and grooved into habits
of action creates strength, as nothing else creates it. The difficulty of
conduct does not lie in knowing what it is right to do, but in doing it
when known. Intellectual culture does not touch the conscience. It
provides no motives to overcome the weakness of the will, and with wider
knowledge it brings also new temptations. The sense of duty is present in
each detail of life; the obligatory "must" which binds the will to the
course which right principle has marked out for it produces a fibre like
the fibre of the oak. The educated Greeks knew little of it. They had
courage and genius and enthusiasm, but they had no horror of immorality as
such. The Stoics saw what was wanting, and tried to supply it; but though
they could provide a theory of action, they could not make the theory into
a reality, and it is noticeable that Stoicism as a rule of life became
important only when adopted by the Romans. The Catholic Church effected
something in its better days when it had its courts which treated sins as
crimes. Calvinism, while it was believed, produced characters nobler and
grander than any which Republican Rome produced. But the Catholic Church
turned its penances into money payments. Calvinism made demands on faith
beyond what truth would bear; and when doubt had once entered, the spell
of Calvinism was broken. The veracity of the Romans, and perhaps the happy
accident that they had no inherited religious traditions, saved them for
centuries from similar trials. They had hold of real truth unalloyed with
baser metal; and truth had made them free and kept them so. When all else
has passed away, when theologies have yielded up their real meaning, and
creeds and symbols have become transparent, and man is again in contact
with the hard facts of nature, it will be found that the "Virtues" which
the Romans made into gods contain in them the essence of true religion,
that in them lies the special characteristic which distinguishes human
beings from the rest of animated things. Every other creature exists for
itself, and cares for its own preservation. Nothing larger or better is
expected from it or possible to it. To man it is said, you do not live for
yourself. If you live for yourself you shall come to nothing. Be brave, be
just, be pure, be true in word and deed; care not for your enjoyment, care
not for your life; care only for what is right. So, and not otherwise, it
shall be well with you. So the Maker of you has ordered, whom you will
disobey at your peril.

Thus and thus only are nations formed which are destined to endure; and as
habits based on such convictions are slow in growing, so when grown to
maturity they survive extraordinary trials. But nations are made up of
many persons in circumstances of endless variety. In country districts,
where the routine of life continues simple, the type of character remains
unaffected; generation follows on generation exposed to the same
influences and treading in the same steps. But the morality of habit,
though the most important element in human conduct, is still but a part of
it. Moral habits grow under given conditions. They correspond to a given
degree of temptation. When men are removed into situations where the use
and wont of their fathers no longer meets their necessities; where new
opportunities are offered to them; where their opinions are broken in upon
by new ideas; where pleasures tempt them on every side, and they have but
to stretch out their hand to take them--moral habits yield under the
strain, and they have no other resource to fall back upon. Intellectual
cultivation brings with it rational interests. Knowledge, which looks
before and after, acts as a restraining power, to help conscience when it
flags. The sober and wholesome manners of life among the early Romans had
given them vigorous minds in vigorous bodies. The animal nature had grown
as strongly as the moral nature, and along with it the animal appetites;
and when appetites burst their traditionary restraints, and man in himself
has no other notion of enjoyment beyond bodily pleasure, he may pass by an
easy transition into a mere powerful brute. And thus it happened with the
higher classes at Rome after the destruction of Carthage. Italy had fallen
to them by natural and wholesome expansion; but from being sovereigns of
Italy, they became a race of imperial conquerors. Suddenly, and in
comparatively a few years after the one power was gone which could resist
them, they became the actual or virtual rulers of the entire circuit of
the Mediterranean. The south-east of Spain, the coast of France from the
Pyrenees to Nice, the north of Italy, Illyria and Greece, Sardinia,
Sicily, and the Greek Islands, the southern and western shores of Asia
Minor, were Roman provinces, governed directly under Roman magistrates. On
the African side Mauritania (Morocco) was still free. Numidia (the modern
Algeria) retained its native dynasty, but was a Roman dependency. The
Carthaginian dominions, Tunis and Tripoli, had been annexed to the Empire.
The interior of Asia Minor up to the Euphrates, with Syria and Egypt, were
under sovereigns called Allies, but, like the native princes in India,
subject to a Roman protectorate. Over this enormous territory, rich with
the accumulated treasures of centuries, and inhabited by thriving,
industrious races, the energetic Roman men of business had spread and
settled themselves, gathering into their hands the trade, the financial
administration, the entire commercial control of the Mediterranean basin.
They had been trained in thrift and economy, in abhorrence of debt, in
strictest habits of close and careful management. Their frugal education,
their early lessons in the value of money, good and excellent as those
lessons were, led them, as a matter of course, to turn to account their
extraordinary opportunities. Governors with their staffs, permanent
officials, contractors for the revenue, negotiators, bill-brokers,
bankers, merchants, were scattered everywhere in thousands. Money poured
in upon them in rolling streams of gold. The largest share of the spoils
fell to the Senate and the senatorial families. The Senate was the
permanent Council of State, and was the real administrator of the Empire.
The Senate had the control of the treasury, conducted the public policy,
appointed from its own ranks the governors of the provinces. It was
patrician in sentiment, but not necessarily patrician in composition. The
members of it had virtually been elected for life by the people, and were
almost entirely those who had been quaestors, aediles, praetors, or
consuls; and these offices had been long open to the plebeians. It was an
aristocracy, in theory a real one, but tending to become, as civilization
went forward, an aristocracy of the rich. How the senatorial privileges
affected the management of the provinces will be seen more particularly as
we go on. It is enough at present to say that the nobles and great
commoners of Rome rapidly found themselves in possession of revenues which
their fathers could not have imagined in their dreams, and money in the
stage of progress at which Rome had arrived was convertible into power.

The opportunities opened for men to advance their fortunes in other parts
of the world drained Italy of many of its most enterprising citizens. The
grandsons of the yeomen who had held at bay Pyrrhus and Hannibal sold
their farms and went away. The small holdings merged rapidly into large
estates bought up by the Roman capitalists. At the final settlement of
Italy, some millions of acres had been reserved to the State as public
property. The "public land," as the reserved portion was called, had been
leased on easy terms to families with political influence, and by lapse of
time, by connivance and right of occupation, these families were beginning
to regard their tenures as their private property, and to treat them as
lords of manors in England have treated the "commons." Thus everywhere the
small farmers were disappearing, and the soil of Italy was fast passing
into the hands of a few territorial magnates, who, unfortunately (for it
tended to aggravate the mischief), were enabled by another cause to turn
their vast possessions to advantage. The conquest of the world had turned
the flower of the defeated nations into slaves. The prisoners taken either
after a battle or when cities surrendered unconditionally were bought up
steadily by contractors who followed in the rear of the Roman armies. They
were not ignorant like the negroes, but trained, useful, and often
educated men, Asiatics, Greeks, Thracians, Gauls, and Spaniards, able at
once to turn their hands to some form of skilled labor, either as clerks,
mechanics, or farm-servants. The great landowners might have paused in
their purchases had the alternative lain before them of letting their
lands lie idle or of having freemen to cultivate them. It was otherwise
when a resource so convenient and so abundant was opened at their feet.
The wealthy Romans bought slaves by thousands. Some they employed in their
workshops in the capital. Some they spread over their plantations,
covering the country, it might be, with olive gardens and vineyards,
swelling further the plethoric figures of their owners' incomes. It was
convenient for the few, but less convenient for the Commonwealth. The
strength of Rome was in her free citizens. Where a family of slaves was
settled down, a village of freemen had disappeared; the material for the
legions diminished; the dregs of the free population which remained behind
crowded into Rome, without occupation except in politics, and with no
property save in their votes, of course to become the clients of the
millionaires, and to sell themselves to the highest bidders. With all his
wealth there were but two things which the Roman noble could buy,
political power and luxury; and in these directions his whole resources
were expended. The elections, once pure, became matters of annual bargain
between himself and his supporters. The once hardy, abstemious mode of
living degenerated into grossness and sensuality.

And his character was assailed simultaneously on another side with equally
mischievous effect. The conquest of Greece brought to Rome a taste for
knowledge and culture; but the culture seldom passed below the surface,
and knowledge bore but the old fruit which it had borne in Eden. The elder
Cato used to say that the Romans were like their slaves--the less Greek
they knew the better they were. They had believed in the gods with pious
simplicity. The Greeks introduced them to an Olympus of divinities whom
the practical Roman found that he must either abhor or deny to exist. The
"Virtues" which he had been taught to reverence had no place among the
graces of the new theology. Reverence Jupiter he could not, and it was
easy to persuade him that Jupiter was an illusion; that all religions were
but the creations of fancy, his own among them. Gods there might be, airy
beings in the deeps of space, engaged like men with their own enjoyments;
but to suppose that these high spirits fretted themselves with the affairs
of the puny beings that crawled upon the earth was a delusion of vanity.
Thus, while morality was assailed on one side by extraordinary
temptations, the religious sanction of it was undermined on the other.
The, Romans ceased to believe, and in losing their faith they became as
steel becomes when it is demagnetized; the spiritual quality was gone out
of them, and the high society of Rome itself became a society of powerful
animals with an enormous appetite for pleasure. Wealth poured in more and
more, and luxury grew more unbounded. Palaces sprang up in the city,
castles in the country, villas at pleasant places by the sea, and parks,
and fish-ponds, and game-preserves, and gardens, and vast retinues of
servants. When natural pleasures had been indulged in to satiety,
pleasures which were against nature were imported from the East to
stimulate the exhausted appetite. To make money--money by any means,
lawful or unlawful--became the universal passion. Even the most cultivated
patricians were coarse alike in their habits and their amusements. They
cared for art as dilettanti, but no schools either of sculpture or
painting were formed among themselves. They decorated their porticos and
their saloons with the plunder of the East. The stage was never more than
an artificial taste with them; their delight was the delight of
barbarians, in spectacles, in athletic exercises, in horse-races and
chariot-races, in the combats of wild animals in the circus, combats of
men with beasts on choice occasions, and, as a rare excitement, in fights
between men and men, when select slaves trained as gladiators were matched
in pairs to kill each other. Moral habits are all-sufficient while they
last; but with rude strong natures they are but chains which hold the
passions prisoners. Let the chain break, and the released brute is but the
more powerful for evil from the force which his constitution has
inherited. Money! the cry was still money!--money was the one thought from
the highest senator to the poorest wretch who sold his vote in the
Comitia. For money judges gave unjust decrees and juries gave corrupt
verdicts. Governors held their provinces for one, two, or three years;
they went out bankrupt from extravagance, they returned with millions for
fresh riot. To obtain a province was the first ambition of a Roman noble.
The road to it lay through the praetorship and the consulship; these
offices, therefore, became the prizes of the State; and being in the gift
of the people, they were sought after by means which demoralized alike the
givers and the receivers. The elections were managed by clubs and
coteries; and, except on occasions of national danger or political
excitement, those who spent most freely were most certain of success.

Under these conditions the chief powers in the Commonwealth necessarily
centred in the rich. There was no longer an aristocracy of birth, still
less of virtue. The patrician families had the start in the race. Great
names and great possessions came to them by inheritance. But the door of
promotion was open to all who had the golden key. The great commoners
bought their way into the magistracies. From the magistracies they passed
into the Senate; and the Roman senator, though in Rome itself and in free
debate among his colleagues he was handled as an ordinary man, when he
travelled had the honors of a sovereign. The three hundred senators of
Rome were three hundred princes. They moved about in other countries with
the rights of legates, at the expense of the province, with their trains
of slaves and horses. The proud privilege of Roman citizenship was still
jealously reserved to Rome itself and to a few favored towns and colonies;
and a mere subject could maintain no rights against a member of the
haughty oligarchy which controlled the civilized world. Such generally the
Roman Republic had become, or was tending to become, in the years which
followed the fall of Carthage, B.C. 146. Public spirit in the masses was
dead or sleeping; the Commonwealth was a plutocracy. The free forms of the
constitution were themselves the instruments of corruption. The rich were
happy in the possession of all that they could desire. The multitude was
kept quiet by the morsels of meat which were flung to it when it
threatened to be troublesome. The seven thousand in Israel, the few who in
all states and in all times remained pure in the midst of evil, looked on
with disgust, fearing that any remedy which they might try might be worse
than the disease. All orders in a society may be wise and virtuous, but
all cannot be rich. Wealth which is used only for idle luxury is always
envied, and envy soon curdles into hate. It is easy to persuade the masses
that the good things of this world are unjustly divided, especially when
it happens to be the exact truth. It is not easy to set limits to an
agitation once set on foot, however justly it may have been provoked, when
the cry for change is at once stimulated by interest and can disguise its
real character under the passionate language of patriotism. But it was not
to be expected that men of noble natures, young men especially whose
enthusiasm had not been cooled by experience, would sit calmly by while
their country was going thus headlong to perdition. Redemption, if
redemption was to be hoped for, could come only from free citizens in the
country districts whose manners and whoso minds were still uncontaminated,
in whom the ancient habits of life still survived, who still believed in
the gods, who were contented to follow the wholesome round of honest
labor. The numbers of such citizens were fast dwindling away before the
omnivorous appetite of the rich for territorial aggrandizement. To rescue
the land from the monopolists, to renovate the old independent yeomanry,
to prevent the free population of Italy, out of which the legions had been
formed which had built up the Empire, from being pushed out of their
places and supplanted by foreign slaves, this, if it could be done, would
restore the purity of the constituency, snatch the elections from the
control of corruption, and rear up fresh generations of peasant soldiers
to preserve the liberties and the glories which their fathers had won.




CHAPTER III.


Tiberius Gracchus was born about the year 164 B.C. He was one of twelve
children, nine of whom died in infancy, himself, his brother Caius, and
his sister Cornelia being the only survivors. His family was plebeian, but
of high antiquity, his ancestors for several generations having held the
highest offices in the Republic. On the mother's side he was the grandson
of Scipio Africanus. His father, after a distinguished career as a soldier
in Spain and Sardinia, had attempted reforms at Rome. He had been censor,
and in this capacity he had ejected disreputable senators from the Curia;
he had degraded offending equites; he had rearranged and tried to purify
the Comitia. But his connections were aristocratic. His wife was the
daughter of the most illustrious of the Scipios. His own daughter was
married to the second most famous of them, Scipio Africanus the Younger.
He had been himself in antagonism with the tribunes, and had taken no part
at any time in popular agitations.

The father died when Tiberius was still a boy, and the two brothers grew
up under the care of their mother, a noble and gifted lady. They displayed
early remarkable talents. Tiberius, when old enough, went into the army,
and served under his brother-in-law in the last Carthaginian campaign. He
was first on the walls of the city in the final storm. Ten years later he
went to Spain as Quaestor, where he carried on his father's popularity,
and by taking the people's side in some questions fell into disagreement
with his brother-in-law. His political views had perhaps already inclined
to change. He was still of an age when indignation at oppression calls out
a practical desire to resist it. On his journey home from Spain he
witnessed scenes which confirmed his conviction and determined him to
throw all his energies into the popular cause. His road lay through
Tuscany, where he saw the large-estate system in full operation--the
fields cultivated by the slave gangs, the free citizens of the Republic
thrust away into the towns, aliens and outcasts in their own country,
without a foot of soil which they could call their own. In Tuscany, too,
the vast domains of the landlords had not even been fairly purchased. They
were parcels of the _ager publicus_, land belonging to the State,
which, in spite of a law forbidding it, the great lords and commoners had
appropriated and divided among themselves. Five hundred acres of State
land was the most which by statute any one lessee might be allowed to
occupy. But the law was obsolete or sleeping, and avarice and vanity were
awake and active. Young Gracchus, in indignant pity, resolved to rescue
the people's patrimony. He was chosen tribune in the year 133. His brave
mother and a few patricians of the old type encouraged him, and the battle
of the revolution began. The Senate, as has been said, though without
direct legislative authority, had been allowed the right of reviewing any
new schemes which were to be submitted to the assembly. The constitutional
means of preventing tribunes from carrying unwise or unwelcome measures
lay in a consul's veto, or in the help of the College of Augurs, who could
declare the auspices unfavorable, and so close all public business. These
resources were so awkward that it had been found convenient to secure
beforehand the Senate's approbation, and the encroachment, being long
submitted to, was passing by custom into a rule. But the Senate, eager as
it was, had not yet succeeded in engrafting the practice into the
constitution. On the land question the leaders of the aristocracy were the
principal offenders. Disregarding usage, and conscious that the best men
of all ranks were with him, Tiberius Gracchus appealed directly to the
people to revive the agrarian law. His proposals were not extravagant.
That they should have been deemed extravagant was a proof of how much some
measure of the kind was needed. Where lands had been enclosed and money
laid out on them he was willing that the occupants should have
compensation. But they had no right to the lands themselves. Gracchus
persisted that the _ager publicus_ belonged to the people, and that
the race of yeomen, for whose protection the law had been originally
passed, must be re-established on their farms. No form of property gives
to its owners so much consequence as land, and there is no point on which
in every country an aristocracy is more sensitive. The large owners
protested that they had purchased their interests on the faith that the
law was obsolete. They had planted and built and watered with the sanction
of the government, and to call their titles in question was to shake the
foundations of society. The popular party pointed to the statute. The
monopolists were entitled in justice to less than was offered them. They
had no right to a compensation at all. Political passion awoke again after
the sleep of a century. The oligarchy had doubtless connived at the
accumulations. The suppression of the small holdings favored their
supremacy, and placed the elections more completely in their control.
Their military successes had given them so long a tenure of power that
they had believed it to be theirs in perpetuity; and the new sedition, as
they called it, threatened at once their privileges and their fortunes.
The quarrel assumed the familiar form of a struggle between the rich and
the poor, and at such times the mob of voters becomes less easy to
corrupt. They go with their order, as the prospect of larger gain makes
them indifferent to immediate bribes. It became clear that the majority of
the citizens would support Tiberius Gracchus, but the constitutional forms
of opposition might still be resorted to. Octavius Caecina, another of the
tribunes, had himself large interests in the land question. He was the
people's magistrate, one of the body appointed especially to defend their
rights, but he went over to the Senate, and, using a power which
undoubtedly belonged to him, he forbade the vote to be taken.

There was no precedent for the removal of either consul, praetor, or
tribune, except under circumstances very different from any which could as
yet be said to have arisen. The magistrates held office for a year only,
and the power of veto had been allowed them expressly to secure time for
deliberation and to prevent passionate legislation. But Gracchus was young
and enthusiastic. Precedent or no precedent, the citizens were omnipotent.
He invited them to declare his colleague deposed. They had warmed to the
fight, and complied. A more experienced statesman would have known that
established constitutional bulwarks cannot be swept away by a momentary
vote. He obtained his agrarian law. Three commissioners were appointed,
himself, his younger brother, and his father-in-law, Appius Claudius, to
carry it into effect; but the very names showed that he had alienated his
few supporters in the higher circles, and that a single family was now
contending against the united wealth and distinction of Rome. The issue
was only too certain. Popular enthusiasm is but a fire of straw. In a year
Tiberius Gracchus would be out of office. Other tribunes would be chosen
more amenable to influence, and his work could then be undone. He
evidently knew that those who would succeed him could not be relied on to
carry on his policy. He had taken one revolutionary step already; he was
driven on to another, and he offered himself illegally to the Comitia for
re-election. It was to invite them to abolish the constitution and to make
him virtual sovereign; and that a young man of thirty should have
contemplated such a position for himself as possible is of itself a proof
of his unfitness for it. The election-day came. The noble lords and
gentlemen appeared in the Campus Martius with their retinues of armed
servants and clients; hot-blooded aristocrats, full of disdain for
demagogues, and meaning to read a lesson to sedition which it would not
easily forget. Votes were given for Gracchus. Had the hustings been left
to decide the matter, he would have been chosen; but as it began to appear
how the polling would go, sticks were used and swords; a riot rose, the
unarmed citizens were driven off, Tiberius Gracchus himself and three
hundred of his friends were killed and their bodies were flung into the
Tiber.

Thus the first sparks of the coming revolution were trampled out. But
though quenched and to be again quenched with fiercer struggles, it was to
smoulder and smoke and burst out time after time, till its work was done.
Revolution could not restore the ancient character of the Roman nation,
but it could check the progress of decay by burning away the more
corrupted parts of it. It could destroy the aristocracy and the
constitution which they had depraved, and under other forms present for a
few more centuries the Roman dominion. Scipio Africanus, when he heard in
Spain of the end of his brother-in-law, exclaimed, "May all who act as he
did perish like him!" There were to be victims enough and to spare before
the bloody drama was played out. Quiet lasted for ten years, and then,
precisely when he had reached his brother's age, Caius Gracchus came
forward to avenge him, and carry the movement through another stage. Young
Caius had been left one of the commissioners of the land law; and it is
particularly noticeable that though the author of it had been killed, the
law had survived him being too clearly right and politic in itself to be
openly set aside. For two years the commissioners had continued to work,
and in that time forty thousand families were settled on various parts of
the _ager publicus_, which the patricians had been compelled to
resign. This was all which they could do. The displacement of one set of
inhabitants and the introduction of another could not be accomplished
without quarrels, complaints, and perhaps some injustice. Those who were
ejected were always exasperated. Those who entered on possession were not
always satisfied. The commissioners became unpopular. When the cries
against them became loud enough, they were suspended, and the law was then
quietly repealed. The Senate had regained its hold over the assembly, and
had a further opportunity of showing its recovered ascendency when, two
years after the murder of Tiberius Gracchus, one of his friends introduced
a bill to make the tribunes legally re-eligible. Caius Gracchus actively
supported the change, but it had no success; and, waiting till times had
altered, and till he had arrived himself at an age when he could carry
weight, the young brother retired from politics, and spent the next few
years with the army in Africa and Sardinia. He served with distinction; he
made a name for himself both as a soldier and an administrator. Had the
Senate left him alone, he might have been satisfied with a regular career,
and have risen by the ordinary steps to the consulship. But the Senate saw
in him the possibilities of a second Tiberius; the higher his reputation,
the more formidable he became to them. They vexed him with petty
prosecutions, charged him with crimes which had no existence, and at
length by suspicion and injustice drove him into open war with them. Caius
Gracchus had a broader intellect than his brother, and a character
considerably less noble. The land question he perceived was but one of
many questions. The true source of the disorders of the Commonwealth was
the Senate itself. The administration of the Empire was in the hands of
men totally unfit to be trusted with it, and there he thought the reform
must commence. He threw himself on the people. He was chosen tribune in
123, ten years exactly after Tiberius. He had studied the disposition of
parties. He had seen his brother fall because the equites and the
senators, the great commoners and the nobles, were combined against him.
He revived the agrarian law as a matter of course, but he disarmed the
opposition to it by throwing an apple of discord between the two superior
orders. The high judicial functions in the Commonwealth had been hitherto
a senatorial monopoly. All cases of importance, civil or criminal, came
before courts of sixty or seventy jurymen, who, as the law stood, must be
necessarily senators. The privilege had been extremely lucrative. The
corruption of justice was already notorious, though it had not yet reached
the level of infamy which it attained in another generation. It was no
secret that in ordinary causes jurymen had sold their verdicts; and, far
short of taking bribes in the direct sense of the word, there were many
ways in which they could let themselves be approached and their favor
purchased. A monopoly of privileges is always invidious. A monopoly in the
sale of justice is alike hateful to those who abhor iniquity on principle
and to those who would like to share the profits of it. But this was not
the worst. The governors of the provinces, being chosen from those who had
been consuls or praetors, were necessarily members of the Senate.
Peculation and extortion in these high functions were offences in theory
of the gravest kind; but the offender could only be tried before a limited
number of his peers, and a governor who had plundered a subject state,
sold justice, pillaged temples, and stolen all that he could lay hands on,
was safe from punishment if he returned to Rome a millionaire and would
admit others to a share in his spoils. The provincials might send
deputations to complain, but these complaints came before men who had
themselves governed provinces or else aspired to govern them. It had been
proved in too many instances that the law which professed to protect them
was a mere mockery.

Caius Gracchus secured the affections of the knights to himself, and some
slightly increased chance of an improvement in the provincial
administration, by carrying a law in the assembly disabling the senators
from sitting on juries of any kind from that day forward, and transferring
the judicial functions to the equites. How bitterly must such a measure
have been resented by the Senate, which at once robbed them of their
protective and profitable privileges, handed them over to be tried by
their rivals for their pleasant irregularities, and stamped them at the
same time with the brand of dishonesty! How certainly must such a measure
have been deserved when neither consul nor tribune could be found to
interpose his veto! Supported by the grateful knights, Caius Gracchus was
for the moment all-powerful. It was not enough to restore the agrarian
law. He passed another, aimed at his brother's murderers, which was to
bear fruit in later years, that no Roman citizen might be put to death by
any person, however high in authority, without legal trial, and without
appeal, if he chose to make it, to the sovereign people. A blow was thus
struck against another right claimed by the Senate, of declaring the
Republic in danger, and the temporary suspension of the constitution.
These measures might be excused, and perhaps commended; but the younger
Gracchus connected his name with another change less commendable, which
was destined also to survive and bear fruit. He brought forward and
carried through, with enthusiastic clapping of every pair of hands in Rome
that were hardened with labor, a proposal that there should be public
granaries in the city, maintained and filled at the cost of the State, and
that corn should be sold at a rate artificially cheap to the poor free
citizens. Such a law was purely socialistic. The privilege was confined to
Rome, because in Rome the elections were held, and the Roman constituency
was the one depositary of power. The effect was to gather into the city a
mob of needy, unemployed voters, living on the charity of the State, to
crowd the circus and to clamor at the elections, available no doubt
immediately to strengthen the hands of the popular tribune, but certain in
the long-run to sell themselves to those who could bid highest for their
voices. Excuses could be found, no doubt, for this miserable expedient in
the state of parties, in the unscrupulous violence of the aristocracy, in
the general impoverishment of the peasantry through the land monopoly, and
in the intrusion upon Italy of a gigantic system of slave labor. But none
the less it was the deadliest blow which had yet been dealt to the
constitution. Party government turns on the majorities at the
polling-places, and it was difficult afterward to recall a privilege which
once conceded appeared to be a right. The utmost that could be ventured in
later times with any prospect of success was to limit an intolerable evil;
and if one side was ever strong enough to make the attempt, their rivals
had a bribe ready in their hands to buy back the popular support. Caius
Gracchus, however, had his way, and carried all before him. He escaped the
rock on which his brother had been wrecked. He was elected tribune a
second time. He might have had a third term if he had been contented to be
a mere demagogue. But he, too, like Tiberius, had honorable aims. The
powers which he had played into the hands of the mob to obtain he desired
to use for high purposes of statesmanship, and his instrument broke in his
hands. He was too wise to suppose that a Roman mob, fed by bounties from
the treasury, could permanently govern the world. He had schemes for
scattering Roman colonies, with the Roman franchise, at various points of
the Empire. Carthage was to be one of them. He thought of abolishing the
distinction between Romans and Italians, and enfranchising the entire
peninsula. These measures were good in themselves--essential, indeed, if
the Roman conquests were to form a compact and permanent dominion. But the
object was not attainable on the road on which Gracchus had entered. The
vagabond part of the constituency was well contented with what it had
obtained--a life in the city, supported at the public expense, with
politics and games for its amusements. It had not the least inclination to
be drafted off into settlements in Spain or Africa, where there would be
work instead of pleasant idleness. Carthage was still a name of terror. To
restore Carthage was no better than treason. Still less had the Roman
citizens an inclination to share their privileges with Samnites and
Etruscans, and see the value of their votes watered down. Political storms
are always cyclones. The gale from the east to-day is a gale from the west
to-morrow. Who and what were the Gracchi, then?--the sweet voices began to
ask--ambitious intriguers, aiming at dictatorship or perhaps the crown.
The aristocracy were right after all; a few things had gone wrong, but
these had been amended. The Scipios and Metelli had conquered the world:
the Scipios and Metelli were alone fit to govern it. Thus when the
election time came round, the party of reform was reduced to a minority of
irreconcilable radicals who were easily disposed of. Again, as ten years
before, the noble lords armed their followers. Riots broke out and
extended day after day. Caius Gracchus was at last killed, as his brother
had been, and under cover of the disturbance three thousand of his friends
were killed along with him. The power being again securely in their hands,
the Senate proceeded at their leisure, and the surviving patriots who were
in any way notorious or dangerous were hunted down in legal manner and put
to death or banished.




CHAPTER IV.


Caius Gracchus was killed at the close of the year 122. The storm was
over. The Senate was once more master of the situation, and the optimates,
"the best party in the State," as they were pleased to call themselves,
smoothed their ruffled plumes and settled again into their places. There
was no more talk of reform. Of the Gracchi there remained nothing but the
forty thousand peasant-proprietors settled on the public lands; the jury
law, which could not be at once repealed for fear of the equites; the corn
grants, and the mob attracted by the bounty, which could be managed by
improved manipulation; and the law protecting the lives of Roman citizens,
which survived in the statute-book, although the Senate still claimed the
right to set it aside when they held the State to be in danger. With these
exceptions, the administration fell back into its old condition. The
tribunes ceased to agitate. The consulships and the praetorships fell to
the candidates whom the Senate supported. Whether the oligarchy had learnt
any lessons of caution from the brief political earthquake which had
shaken but not overthrown them remained to be seen. Six years after the
murder of Caius Gracchus an opportunity was afforded to this distinguished
body of showing on a conspicuous scale the material of which they were now
composed.

Along the south shore of the Mediterranean, west of the Roman province,
extended the two kingdoms of the Numidians and the Moors. To what race
these people belonged is not precisely known. They were not negroes. The
negro tribes have never extended north of the Sahara. Nor were they
Carthaginians or allied to the Carthaginians. The Carthaginian colony
found them in possession on its arrival. Sallust says that they were
Persians left behind by Hercules after his invasion of Spain. Sallust's
evidence proves no more than that their appearance was Asiatic, and that
tradition assigned them an Asiatic origin. They may be called generically
Arabs, who at a very ancient time had spread along the coast from Egypt to
Morocco. The Numidians at this period were civilized according to the
manners of the age. They had walled towns; they had considerable wealth;
their lands were extensively watered and cultivated; their great men had
country houses and villas, the surest sign of a settled state of society.
Among the equipments of their army they had numerous elephants (it may be
presumed of the African breed), which they and the Carthaginians had
certainly succeeded in domesticating. Masinissa, the king of this people,
had been the ally of Rome in the last Carthaginian war; he had been
afterward received as "a friend of the Republic," and was one of the
protected sovereigns. He was succeeded by his son Micipsa, who in turn had
two legitimate children, Hiempsal and Adherbal, and an illegitimate nephew
Jugurtha, considerably older than his own boys, a young man of striking
talent and promise. Micipsa, who was advanced in years, was afraid that if
he died this brilliant youth might be a dangerous rival to his sons. He
therefore sent him to serve under Scipio in Spain, with the hope, so his
friends asserted, that he might there perhaps be killed. The Roman army
was then engaged in the siege of Numantia. The camp was the lounging-place
of the young patricians who were tired of Rome and wished for excitement.
Discipline had fallen loose; the officers' quarters were the scene of
extravagance and amusement. Jugurtha recommended himself on the one side
to Scipio by activity and good service, while on the other he made
acquaintances among the high-bred gentlemen in the mess-rooms. He found
them in themselves dissolute and unscrupulous. He discovered, through
communications which he was able with their assistance to open with their
fathers and relatives at Rome, that a man with money might do what he
pleased. Micipsa's treasury was well supplied, and Jugurtha hinted among
his comrades that if he could be secure of countenance in seizing the
kingdom, he would be in a position to show his gratitude in a substantial
manner. Some of these conversations reached the ears of Scipio, who sent
for Jugurtha and gave him a friendly warning. He dismissed him, however,
with honor at the end of the campaign. The young prince returned to Africa
loaded with distinctions, and the king, being now afraid to pass him over,
named him as joint-heir with his children to a third part of Numidia. The
Numidians perhaps objected to being partitioned. Micipsa died soon after.
Jugurtha at once murdered Hiempsal, claimed the sovereignty, and attacked
his other cousin. Adherbal, closely besieged in the town of Cirta, which
remained faithful to him, appealed to Rome; but Jugurtha had already
prepared his ground, and knew that he had nothing to fear. The Senate sent
out commissioners. The commissioners received the bribes which they
expected. They gave Jugurtha general instructions to leave his cousin in
peace; but they did not wait to see their orders obeyed, and went quietly
home. The natural results immediately followed. Jugurtha pressed the siege
more resolutely. The town surrendered; Adherbal was taken, and was put to
death after being savagely tortured; and there being no longer any
competitor alive in whose behalf the Senate could be called on to
interfere, he thought himself safe from further interference.
Unfortunately in the capture of Citra a number of Romans who resided there
had been killed after the surrender, and after a promise that their lives
should be spared. An outcry was raised in Rome, and became so loud that
the Senate was forced to promise investigation; but it went to work
languidly, with reluctance so evident as to rouse suspicion.
Notwithstanding the fate of the Gracchi and their friends, Memmius, a
tribune, was found bold enough to tell the people that there were men in
the Senate who had taken bribes.

The Senate, conscious of its guilt, was now obliged to exert itself. War
was declared against Jugurtha, and a consul was sent to Africa with an
army. But the consul, too, had his fortune to make, and Micipsa's
treasures were still unexpended. The consul took with him a staff of young
patricians, whose families might be counted on to shield him in return for
a share of the plunder. Jugurtha was as liberal as avarice could desire,
and peace was granted to him on the easy conditions of a nominal fine, and
the surrender of some elephants, which the consul privately restored.

Public opinion was singularly patient. The massacre six years before had
killed out the liberal leaders, and there was no desire on any side as yet
to renew the struggle with the Senate. But it was possible to presume too
far on popular acquiescence. Memmius came forward again, and in a
passionate speech in the Forum exposed and denounced the scandalous
transaction. The political sky began to blacken again. The Senate could
not face another storm with so bad a cause, and Jugurtha was sent for to
Rome. He came, with contemptuous confidence, loaded with gold. He could
not corrupt Memmius, but he bought easily the rest of the tribunes. The
leaders in the Curia could not quarrel with a client of such delightful
liberality. He had an answer to every complaint, and a fee to silence the
complainer. He would have gone back in triumph, had he not presumed a
little too far. He had another cousin in the city who he feared might one
day give him trouble, so he employed one of his suite to poison him. The
murder was accomplished successfully; and for this too he might no doubt
have secured his pardon by paying for it; but the price demanded was too
high, and perhaps Jugurtha, villain as he was, came at last to disdain the
wretches whom he might consider fairly to be worse than himself. He had
come over under a safe-conduct, and he was not detained. The Senate
ordered him to leave Italy; and he departed with the scornful phrase on
his lips which has passed into history: "Venal city, and soon to perish if
only it can find a purchaser." [1]

A second army was sent across, to end the scandal. This time the Senate
was in earnest, but the work was less easy than was expected. Army
management had fallen into disorder. In earlier times each Roman citizen
had provided his own equipments at his own expense. To be a soldier was
part of the business of his life, and military training was an essential
feature of his education. The old system had broken down; the peasantry,
from whom the rank and file of the legions had been recruited, were no
longer able to furnish their own arms. Caius Gracchus had intended that
arms should be furnished by the government, that a special department
should be constituted to take charge of the arsenals and to see to the
distribution. But Gracchus was dead, and his project had died with him.
When the legions were enrolled, the men were ill armed, undrilled, and
unprovided--a mere mob, gathered hastily together and ignorant of the
first elements of their duty. With the officers it was still worse. The
subordinate commands fell to young patricians, carpet knights who went on
campaigns with their families of slaves. The generals, when a movement was
to be made, looked for instruction to their staff. It sometimes happened
that a consul waited for his election to open for the first time a book of
military history or a Greek manual of the art of war.[2]


[Sidenote: B.C 109.]
An army so composed and so led was not likely to prosper. The Numidians
were not very formidable enemies, but, after a month or two of
manoeuvring, half the Romans were destroyed and the remainder were obliged
to surrender. About the same time, and from similar causes, two Roman
armies were cut to pieces on the Rhone. While the great men at Rome were
building palaces, inventing new dishes, and hiring cooks at unheard-of
salaries, the barbarians were at the gates of Italy. The passes of the
Alps were open, and if a few tribes of Gauls had cared to pour through
them, the Empire was at their mercy. Stung with these accumulating
disgraces, and now really alarmed, the Senate sent Caecilius Metellus, the
best man that they had and the consul for the year following to Africa.
Metellus was an aristocrat, and he was advanced in years; but he was a man
of honor and integrity. He understood the danger of further failure; and
he looked about for the ablest soldier that he could find to go with him,
irrespective of his political opinions.

Caius Marius was at this time forty-eight years old. Two thirds of his
life were over, and a name which was to sound throughout the world and be
remembered through all ages had as yet been scarcely heard of beyond the
army and the political clubs in Rome. He was born at Arpinum, a Latin
township, seventy miles from the capital, in the year 157. His father was
a small farmer, and he was himself bred to the plough. He joined the army
early, and soon attracted notice by his punctual discharge of his duties.
In a time of growing looseness, Marius was strict himself in keeping
discipline and in enforcing it as he rose in the service. He was in Spain
when Jugurtha was there, and made himself especially useful to Scipio; he
forced his way steadily upward, by his mere soldierlike qualities, to the
rank of military tribune. Rome, too, had learned to know him, for he was
chosen tribune of the people the year after the murder of Caius Gracchus.
Being a self-made man, he belonged naturally to the popular party. While
in office he gave offence in some way to the men in power, and was called
before the Senate to answer for himself. But he had the right on his side,
it is likely, for they found him stubborn and impertinent, and they could
make nothing of their charges against him. He was not bidding at this
time, however, for the support of the mob. He had the integrity and sense
to oppose the largesses of corn; and he forfeited his popularity by trying
to close the public granaries before the practice had passed into a
system. He seemed as if made of a block of hard Roman oak, gnarled and
knotted, but sound in all its fibres. His professional merit continued to
recommend him. At the age of forty he became praetor, and was sent to
Spain, where he left a mark again by the successful severity by which he
cleared the province of banditti. He was a man neither given himself to
talking nor much talked about in the world; but he was sought for wherever
work was to be done, and he had made himself respected and valued in high
circles, for after his return from the peninsula he had married into one
of the most distinguished of the patrician families.

The Caesars were a branch of the Gens Julia, which claimed descent from
Iulus the son of Aeneas, and thus from the gods. Roman etymologists could
arrive at no conclusion as to the origin of the name. Some derived it from
an exploit on an elephant-hunt in Africa--Caesar meaning elephant in
Moorish; some to the entrance into the world of the first eminent Caesar
by the aid of a surgeon's knife;[3]some from the color of the eyes
prevailing in the family. Be the explanation what it might, eight
generations of Caesars had held prominent positions in the Commonwealth.
They had been consuls, censors, praetors, aediles, and military tribunes,
and in politics, as might be expected from their position, they had been
moderate aristocrats. Like other families they had been subdivided, and
the links connecting them cannot always be traced. The pedigree of the
Dictator goes no further than to his grandfather, Caius Julius. In the
middle of the second century before Christ, this Caius Julius, being
otherwise unknown to history, married a lady named Marcia, supposed to be
descended from Ancus Marcius, the fourth king of Rome. By her he had three
children, Caius Julius, Sextus Julius, and a daughter named Julia. Caius
Julius married Aurelia, perhaps a member of the consular family of the
Cottas, and was the father of the Great Caesar. Julia became the wife of
Caius Marius, a _mesalliance_ which implied the beginning of a
political split in the Caesar family. The elder branches, like the
Cromwells of Hinchinbrook, remained by their order. The younger attached
itself for good or ill to the party of the people.

Marius by this marriage became a person of social consideration. His
father had been a client of the Metelli; and Caecilius Metellus, who must
have known Marius by reputation and probably in person, invited him to go
as second in command in the African campaign. He was moderately
successful. Towns were taken; battles were won: Metellus was
incorruptible, and the Numidians sued for peace. But Jugurtha wanted
terms, and the consul demanded unconditional surrender. Jugurtha withdrew
into the desert; the war dragged on; and Marius, perhaps ambitious,
perhaps impatient at the general's want of vigor, began to think that he
could make quicker work of it. The popular party were stirring again in
Rome, the Senate having so notoriously disgraced itself. There was just
irritation that a petty African prince could defy the whole power of Rome
for so many years; and though a democratic consul had been unheard of for
a century, the name of Marius began to be spoken of as a possible
candidate. Marius consented to stand. The law required that he must be
present in person at the election, and he applied to his commander for
leave of absence. Metellus laughed at his pretensions, and bade him wait
another twenty years. Marius, however, persisted, and was allowed to go.
The patricians strained their resources to defeat him, but he was chosen
with enthusiasm. Metellus was recalled, and the conduct of the Numidian
war was assigned to the new hero of the "populares."

A shudder of alarm ran, no doubt, through the senate-house when the
determination of the people was known. A successful general could not be
disposed of so easily as oratorical tribunes. Fortunately Marius was not a
politician. He had no belief in democracy. He was a soldier, and had a
soldier's way of thinking on government and the methods of it. His first
step was a reformation in the army. Hitherto the Roman legions had been no
more than the citizens in arms, called for the moment from their various
occupations, to return to them when the occasion for their services was
past. Marius had perceived that fewer men, better trained and disciplined,
could he made more effective and be more easily handled. He had studied
war as a science. He had perceived that the present weakness need be no
more than an accident, and that there was a latent force in the Roman
State which needed only organization to resume its ascendency. "He
enlisted," it was said, "the worst of the citizens," men, that is to say,
who had no occupation and who became soldiers by profession; and as
persons without property could not have furnished themselves at their own
cost, he must have carried out the scheme proposed by Gracchus, and
equipped them at the expense of the State. His discipline was of the
sternest. The experiment was new; and men of rank who had a taste for war
in earnest, and did not wish that the popular party should have the whole
benefit and credit of the improvements, were willing to go with him; among
them a dissipated young patrician called Lucius Sylla, whose name also was
destined to be memorable.

By these methods and out of these materials an army was formed such as no
Roman general had hitherto led. It performed extraordinary marches,
carried its water-supplies with it in skins, and followed the enemy across
sandy deserts hitherto found impassable. In less than two years the war
was over. The Moors to whom Jugurtha had fled surrendered him to Sylla,
and he was brought in chains to Rome, where he finished his life in a
dungeon.

So ended a curious episode in Roman history, where it holds a place beyond
its intrinsic importance, from the light which it throws on the character
of the Senate and on the practical working of the institutions which the
Gracchi had perished in unsuccessfully attempting to reform.

[1] "Urbem venalem, et mature perituram, si emptorem invenenit."--Sallust,
    _De Bello Jugurthino_, c. 35. Livy's account of the business,
    however, differs from Sallust's, and the expression is perhaps not
    authentic.

[2] "At ego scio, Quirites, qui, postquam consules facti sunt, acta
    majorum, et Graecorum militaria praecepta legere coeperint. Homines
    praeposteri!"--Speech of Marius, Sallust, _Jugurtha_, 85.

[3] "Caesus ab utero matris."




CHAPTER V.


The Jugurthine war ended in the year 106 B.C. At the same Arpinum which
had produced Marius another actor in the approaching drama was in that
year ushered into the world, Marcus Tullius Cicero. The Ciceros had made
their names, and perhaps their fortunes, by their skill in raising
_cicer_, or vetches. The present representative of the family was a
country gentleman in good circumstances given to literature, residing
habitually at his estate on the Liris and paying occasional visits to
Rome. In that household was born Rome's most eloquent master of the art of
using words, who was to carry that art as far, and to do as much with it,
as any man who has ever appeared on the world's stage.

Rome, however, was for the present in the face of enemies who had to be
encountered with more material weapons. Marius had formed an army barely
in time to save Italy from being totally overwhelmed. A vast migratory
wave of population had been set in motion behind the Rhine and the Danube.
The German forests were uncultivated. The hunting and pasture grounds were
too strait for the numbers crowded into them, and two enormous hordes were
rolling westward and southward in search of some new abiding-place. The
Teutons came from the Baltic down across the Rhine into Luxemburg. The
Cimbri crossed the Danube near its sources into Illyria. Both Teutons and
Cimbri were Germans, and both were making for Gaul by different routes.
The Celts of Gaul had had their day. In past generations they had held the
German invaders at bay, and had even followed them into their own
territories. But they had split among themselves. They no longer offered a
common front to the enemy. They were ceasing to be able to maintain their
own independence, and the question of the future was whether Gaul was to
be the prey of Germany or to be a province of Rome.

Events appeared already to have decided. The invasion of the Teutons and
the Cimbri was like the pouring in of two great rivers. Each division
consisted of hundreds of thousands. They travelled with their wives and
children, their wagons, as with the ancient Scythians and with the modern
South African Dutch, being at once their conveyance and their home. Gray-
haired priestesses tramped along among them, barefooted, in white linen
dresses, the knife at their girdle; northern Iphigenias, sacrificing
prisoners as they were taken to the gods of Valhalla. On they swept,
eating up the country, and the people flying before them. In 113 B.C. the
skirts of the Cimbri had encountered a small Roman force near Trieste, and
destroyed it. Four years later another attempt was made to stop them, but
the Roman army was beaten and its camp taken. The Cimbrian host did not,
however, turn at that time upon Italy. Their aim was the south of France.
They made their way through the Alps into Switzerland, where the Helvetii
joined them, and the united mass rolled over the Jura and down the bank of
the Rhone. Roused at last into exertion, the Senate sent into Gaul the
largest force which the Romans had ever brought into the field. They met
the Cimbri at Orange, and were simply annihilated. Eighty thousand Romans
and forty thousand camp-followers were said to have fallen. The numbers in
such cases are generally exaggerated, but the extravagance of the report
is a witness to the greatness of the overthrow. The Romans had received a
worse blow than at Cannae. They were brave enough, but they were commanded
by persons whose recommendations for command were birth or fortune;
"preposterous men," as Marius termed them, who had waited for their
appointment to open the military manuals.

Had the Cimbri chosen at this moment to recross the Alps into Italy, they
had only to go and take possession, and Alaric would have been antedated
by five centuries. In great danger it was the Senate's business to suspend
the constitution. The constitution was set aside now, but it was set aside
by the people themselves, not by the Senate. One man only could save the
country, and that man was Marius. His consulship was over, and custom
forbade his re-election. The Senate might have appointed him dictator, but
would not. The people, custom or no custom, chose him consul a second
time--a significant acknowledgment that the Empire, which had been won by
the sword, must be held by the sword, and that the sword itself must be
held by the hand that was best fitted to use it. Marius first triumphed
for his African victory, and, as an intimation to the Senate that the
power for the moment was his and not theirs, he entered the Curia in his
triumphal dress. He then prepared for the barbarians who, to the alarmed
imagination of the city, were already knocking at its gates. Time was the
important element in the matter. Had the Cimbri come at once after their
victory at Orange, Italy had been theirs. But they did not come. With the
unguided movements of some wild force of nature they swerved away through
Aquitaine to the Pyrenees. They swept across the mountains into Spain.
Thence, turning north, they passed up the Atlantic coast and round to the
Seine, the Gauls flying before them; thence on to the Rhine, where the
vast body of the Teutons joined them and fresh detachments of the
Helvetii. It was as if some vast tide-wave had surged over the country and
rolled through it, searching out the easiest passages. At length, in two
divisions, the invaders moved definitely toward Italy, the Cimbri
following their old tracks by the eastern Alps toward Aquileia and the
Adriatic, the Teutons passing down through Provence and making for the
road along the Mediterranean. Two years had been consumed in these
wanderings, and Marius was by this time ready for them. The Senate had
dropped the reins, and no longer governed or misgoverned; the popular
party, represented by the army, was supreme. Marius was continued in
office, and was a fourth time consul. He had completed his military
reforms, and the army was now a professional service, with regular pay.
Trained corps of engineers were attached to each legion. The campaigns of
the Romans were thenceforward to be conducted with spade and pickaxe as
much as with sword and javelin, and the soldiers learnt the use of tools
as well as arms. Moral discipline was not forgotten. The foulest of human
vices was growing fashionable in high society in the capital. It was not
allowed to make its way into the army. An officer in one of the legions, a
near relative of Marius, made filthy overtures to one of his men. The man
replied with a thrust of his sword, and Marius publicly thanked and
decorated him.

The effect of the change was like enchantment. The delay of the Germans
made it unnecessary to wait for them in Italy. Leaving Catulus, his
colleague in the consulship, to check the Cimbri in Venetia, Marius went
himself, taking Sylla with him, into the south of France. As the barbarian
host came on, he occupied a fortified camp near Aix. He allowed the
enormous procession to roll past him in their wagons toward the Alps.
Then, following cautiously, he watched his opportunity to fall on them.
The Teutons were brave, but they had no longer mere legionaries to fight
with, but a powerful machine, and the entire mass of them, men, women, and
children, in numbers which however uncertain were rather those of a nation
than an army, were swept out of existence.

The Teutons were destroyed on the 20th of July, 102. In the year following
the same fate overtook their comrades. The Cimbri had forced the passes
through the mountains. They had beaten the unscientific patrician Catulus,
and had driven him back on the Po. But Marius came to his rescue. The
Cimbri were cut to pieces near Mantua, in the summer of 101, and Italy was
saved.

The victories of Marius mark a new epoch in Roman history. The legions
were no longer the levy of the citizens in arms, who were themselves the
State for which they fought. The legionaries were citizens still. They had
votes, and they used them; but they were professional soldiers with the
modes of thought which belong to soldiers, and beside the power of the
hustings was now the power of the sword. The constitution remained to
appearance intact, and means were devised sufficient to encounter, it
might be supposed, the new danger. Standing armies were prohibited in
Italy. Victorious generals returning from campaigns abroad were required
to disband their legions on entering the sacred soil. But the materials of
these legions remained a distinct order from the rest of the population,
capable of instant combination, and in combination irresistible save by
opposing combinations of the same kind. The Senate might continue to
debate, the Comitia might elect the annual magistrates. The established
institutions preserved the form and something of the reality of power in a
people governed so much by habit as the Romans. There is a long twilight
between the time when a god is first suspected to be an idol and his final
overthrow. But the aristocracy had made the first inroad on the
constitution by interfering at the elections with their armed followers
and killing their antagonists. The example once set could not fail to be
repeated, and the rule of an organized force was becoming the only
possible protection against the rule of mobs, patrician or plebeian.

The danger from the Germans was no sooner gone than political anarchy
broke loose again. Marius, the man of the people, was the saviour of his
country. He was made consul a fifth time and a sixth. The party which had
given him his command shared, of course, in his pre-eminence. The
elections could be no longer interfered with or the voters intimidated.
The public offices were filled with the most violent agitators, who
believed that the time had come to revenge the Gracchi and carry out the
democratic revolution, to establish the ideal Republic and the direct rule
of the citizen assembly. This, too, was a chimera. If the Roman Senate
could not govern, far less could the Roman mob govern. Marius stood aside
and let the voices rage. He could not be expected to support a system
which had brought the country so near to ruin. He had no belief in the
visions of the demagogues, but the time was not ripe to make an end of it
all. Had he tried, the army would not have gone with him, so he sat still
till faction had done its work. The popular heroes of the hour were the
tribune Saturninus and the praetor Glaucia. They carried corn laws and
land laws--whatever laws they pleased to propose. The administration
remaining with the Senate, they carried a vote that every senator should
take an oath to execute their laws under penalty of fine and expulsion.
Marius did not like it, and even opposed it, but let it pass at last. The
senators, cowed and humiliated, consented to take the oath, all but one,
Marius's old friend and commander in Africa, Caecilius Metellus. No stain
had ever rested on the name of Metellus. He had accepted no bribes. He had
half beaten Jugurtha, for Marius to finish; and Marius himself stood in a
semi-feudal relation to him. It was unlucky for the democrats that they
had found so honorable an opponent. Metellus persisted in refusal.
Saturninus sent a guard to the senate-house, dragged him out, and expelled
him from the city. Aristocrats and their partisans were hustled and killed
in the street. The patricians had spilt the first blood in the massacre in
121: now it was the turn of the mob.

Marius was an indifferent politician. He perceived as well as any one that
violence must not go on, but he hesitated to put it down. He knew that the
aristocracy feared and hated him. Between them and the people's consul no
alliance was possible. He did not care to alienate his friends, and there
may have been other difficulties which we do not know in his way. The army
itself was perhaps divided. On the popular side there were two parties: a
moderate one, represented by Memmius, who, as tribune, had impeached the
senators for the Jugurthine infamies; the other, the advanced radicals,
led by Glaucia and Saturninus. Memmius and Glaucia were both candidates
for the consulship; and as Memmius was likely to succeed, he was murdered.

Revolutions proceed like the acts of a drama, and each act is divided into
scenes which follow one another with singular uniformity. Ruling powers
make themselves hated by tyranny and incapacity. An opposition is formed
against them, composed of all sorts, lovers of order and lovers of
disorder, reasonable men and fanatics, business-like men and men of
theory. The opposition succeeds; the government is overthrown; the victors
divide into a moderate party and an advanced party. The advanced party go
to the front, till they discredit themselves with crime or folly. The
wheel has then gone round, and the reaction sets in. The murder of Memmius
alienated fatally the respectable citizens. Saturninus and Glaucia were
declared public enemies. They seized the Capitol, and blockaded it.
Patrician Rome turned out and besieged them, and Marius had to interfere.
The demagogues and their friends surrendered, and were confined in the
Curia Hostilia till they could be tried. The noble lords could not allow
such detested enemies the chance of an acquittal. To them a radical was a
foe of mankind, to be hunted down like a wolf, when a chance was offered
to destroy him. By the law of Caius Gracchus no citizen could be put to
death without a trial. The persons of Saturninus and Glaucia were doubly
sacred, for one was tribune and the other praetor. But the patricians were
satisfied that they deserved to be executed, and in such a frame of mind
it seemed but virtue to execute them. They tore off the roof of the senate
house, and pelted the miserable wretches to death with stones and tiles.




CHAPTER VI.


Not far from the scene of the murder of Glaucia and Saturninus there was
lying at this time in his cradle, or carried about in his nurse's arms, a
child who, in his manhood, was to hold an inquiry into this business, and
to bring one of the perpetrators to answer for himself. On the 12th of the
preceding July, B.C. 100,[1] was born into the world Caius Julius Caesar,
the only son of Caius Julius and Aurelia, and nephew of the then Consul
Marius. His father had been praetor, but had held no higher office.
Aurelia was a strict stately lady of the old school, uninfected by the
lately imported fashions. She, or her husband, or both of them, were rich;
but the habits of the household were simple and severe, and the connection
with Marius indicates the political opinions which prevailed in the
family.

No anecdotes are preserved, of Caesar's childhood. He was taught Greek by
Antonius Gnipho, an educated Gaul from the north of Italy. He wrote a poem
when a boy in honor of Hercules. He composed a tragedy on the story of
Oedipus. His passionate attachment to Aurelia in after-years shows that
between mother and child the relations had been affectionate and happy.
But there is nothing to indicate that there was any early precocity of
talent; and leaving Caesar to his grammar and his exercises, we will
proceed with the occurrences which he must have heard talked of in his
father's house, or seen with his eyes when he began to open them. The
society there was probably composed of his uncle's friends; soldiers and
statesmen who had no sympathy with mobs, but detested the selfish and
dangerous system on which the Senate had carried on the government, and
dreaded its consequences. Above the tumults of the factions in the Capitol
a cry rising into shrillness began to be heard from Italy. Caius Gracchus
had wished to extend the Roman franchise to the Italian States, and the
suggestion had cost him his popularity and his life. The Italian provinces
had furnished their share of the armies which had beaten Jugurtha, and had
destroyed the German invaders. They now demanded that they should have the
position which Gracchus designed for them: that they should be allowed to
legislate for themselves, and no longer lie at the mercy of others, who
neither understood their necessities nor cared for their interests. They
had no friends in the city, save a few far-sighted statesmen. Senate and
mob had at least one point of agreement, that the spoils of the Empire
should be fought for among themselves; and at the first mention of the
invasion of their monopoly a law was passed making the very agitation of
the subject punishable by death.

Political convulsions work in a groove, the direction of which varies
little in any age or country. Institutions once sufficient and salutary
become unadapted to a change of circumstances. The traditionary holders of
power see their interests threatened. They are jealous of innovations.
They look on agitators for reform as felonious persons desiring to
appropriate what does not belong to them. The complaining parties are
conscious of suffering and rush blindly on the superficial causes of their
immediate distress. The existing authority is their enemy; and their one
remedy is a change in the system of government. They imagine that they see
what the change should be, that they comprehend what they are doing, and
know where they intend to arrive. They do not perceive that the visible
disorders are no more than symptoms which no measures, repressive or
revolutionary, can do more than palliate. The wave advances and the wave
recedes. Neither party in the struggle can lift itself far enough above
the passions of the moment to study the drift of the general current. Each
is violent, each is one-sided, and each makes the most and the worst of
the sins of its opponents. The one idea of the aggressors is to grasp all
that they can reach. The one idea of the conservatives is to part with
nothing, pretending that the stability of the State depends on adherence
to the principles which have placed them in the position which they hold;
and as various interests are threatened, and as various necessities arise,
those who are one day enemies are frightened the next into unnatural
coalitions, and the next after into more embittered dissensions.

To an indifferent spectator, armed especially with the political
experiences of twenty additional centuries, it seems difficult to
understand how Italy could govern the world. That the world and Italy
besides should continue subject to the population of a single city, of its
limited Latin environs, and of a handful of townships exceptionally
favored, might even then be seen to be plainly impossible. The Italians
were Romans in every point, except in the possession of the franchise.
They spoke the same language; they were subjects of the same dominion.
They were as well educated, they were as wealthy, they were as capable as
the inhabitants of the dominant State. They paid taxes, they fought in the
armies; they were strong; they were less corrupt, politically and morally,
as having fewer temptations and fewer opportunities of evil; and in their
simple country life they approached incomparably nearer to the old Roman
type than the patrician fops in the circus or the Forum, or the city mob
which was fed in idleness on free grants of corn. When Samnium and Tuscany
were conquered, a third of the lands had been confiscated to the Roman
State, under the name of _Ager Publicus_. Samnite and Etruscan
gentlemen had recovered part of it under lease, much as the descendants of
the Irish chiefs held their ancestral domains as tenants of the
Cromwellians. The land law of the Gracchi was well intended, but it bore
hard on many of the leading provincials, who had seen their estates
parcelled out, and their own property, as they deemed it, taken from them
under the land commission. If they were to be governed by Roman laws, they
naturally demanded to be consulted when the laws were made. They might
have been content under a despotism to which Roman and Italian were
subject alike. To be governed under the forms of a free constitution by
men no better than themselves was naturally intolerable.

[Sidenote: B.C. 95.]
[Sidenote: B.C. 91.]
The movement from without united the Romans for the instant in defence of
their privileges. The aristocracy resisted change from instinct; the mob,
loudly as they clamored for their own rights, cared nothing for the rights
of others, and the answer to the petition of the Italians, five years
after the defeat of the Cimbri, was a fierce refusal to permit the
discussion of it. Livius Drusus, one of those unfortunately gifted men who
can see that in a quarrel there is sometimes justice on both sides, made a
vain attempt to secure the provincials a hearing, but he was murdered in
his own house. To be murdered was the usual end of exceptionally
distinguished Romans, in a State where the lives of citizens were
theoretically sacred. His death was the signal for an insurrection, which
began in the mountains of the Abruzzi and spread over the whole peninsula.

The contrast of character between the two classes of population became at
once uncomfortably evident. The provincials had been the right arm of the
Empire. Rome, a city of rich men with families of slaves, and of a crowd
of impoverished freemen without employment to keep them in health and
strength, could no longer bring into the field a force which could hold
its ground against the gentry and peasants of Samnium. The Senate enlisted
Greeks, Numidians, any one whose services they could purchase. They had to
encounter soldiers who had been trained and disciplined by Marius, and
they were taught by defeat upon defeat that they had a worse enemy before
them than the Germans. Marius himself had almost withdrawn from public
life. He had no heart for the quarrel, and did not care greatly to exert
himself. At the bottom, perhaps, he thought that the Italians were in the
right. The Senate discovered that they were helpless, and must come to
terms if they would escape destruction. They abandoned the original point
of difference, and they offered to open the franchise to every Italian
state south of the Po which had not taken arms or which returned
immediately to its allegiance. The war had broken out for a definite
cause. When the cause was removed no reason remained for its continuance.
The Italians were closely connected with Rome. Italians were spread over
the Roman world in active business. They had no wish to overthrow the
Empire if they were allowed to share in its management. The greater part
of them accepted the Senate's terms; and only those remained in the field
who had gone to war in the hope of recovering the lost independence which
their ancestors had so long heroically defended.

The panting Senate was thus able to breathe again. The war continued, but
under better auspices. Sound material could now be collected again for the
army. Marius being in the background, the chosen knight of the
aristocracy, Lucius Sylla, whose fame in the Cimbrian war had been only
second to that of his commander's, came at once to the front.

Sylla, or Sulla, as we are now taught to call him, was born in the year
138 B.C. He was a patrician of the purest blood, had inherited a moderate
fortune, and had spent it like other young men of rank, lounging in
theatres and amusing himself with dinner-parties. He was a poet, an
artist, and a wit, but each and everything with the languor of an amateur.
His favorite associates were actresses, and he had neither obtained nor
aspired to any higher reputation than that of a cultivated man of fashion.
His distinguished birth was not apparent in his person. He had red hair,
hard blue eyes, and a complexion white and purple, with the colors so ill-
mixed that his face was compared to a mulberry sprinkled with flour.
Ambition he appeared to have none; and when he exerted himself to be
appointed quaestor to Marius on the African expedition, Marius was
disinclined to take him as having no recommendation beyond qualifications
which the consul of the plebeians disdained and disliked.

Marius, however, soon discovered his mistake. Beneath his constitutional
indolence Sylla was by nature a soldier, a statesman, a diplomatist. He
had been too contemptuous of the common objects of politicians to concern
himself with the intrigues of the Forum, but he had only to exert himself
to rise with easy ascendency to the command of every situation in which he
might be placed. He had entered with military instinct into Marius's
reform of the army, and became the most active and useful of his officers.
He endeared himself to the legionaries by a tolerance of vices which did
not interfere with discipline; and to Sylla's combined adroitness and
courage Marius owed the final capture of Jugurtha.

Whether Marius became jealous of Sylla on this occasion must be decided by
those who, while they have no better information than others as to the
actions of men, possess, or claim to possess, the most intimate
acquaintance with their motives. They again served together, however,
against the Northern invaders, and Sylla a second time lent efficient help
to give Marius a victory. Like Marius, he had no turn for platform oratory
and little interest in election contests and intrigues. For eight years he
kept aloof from politics, and his name and that of his rival were alike
for all that time almost unheard of. He emerged into special notice only
when he was praetor in the year 93 B.C., and when he characteristically
distinguished his term of office by exhibiting a hundred lions in the
arena matched against Numidian archers. There was no such road to
popularity with the Roman multitude. It is possible that the little
Caesar, then a child of seven, may have been among the spectators, making
his small reflections on it all.

[Sidenote: B.C. 120.]
In 92 Sylla went as propraetor to Asia, where the incapacity of the
Senate's administration was creating another enemy likely to be
troublesome. Mithridates, "child of the sun," pretending to a descent from
Darius Hystaspes, was king of Pontus, one of the semi-independent
monarchies which had been allowed to stand in Asia Minor. The coast-line
of Pontus extended from Sinope to Trebizond, and reached inland to the
line of mountains where the rivers divide which flow into the Black Sea
and the Mediterranean. The father of Mithridates was murdered when he was
a child, and for some years he led a wandering life, meeting adventures
which were as wild and perhaps as imaginary as those of Ulysses. In later
life he became the idol of Eastern imagination, and legend made free with
his history; but he was certainly an extraordinary man. He spoke the
unnumbered dialects of the Asiatic tribes among whom he had travelled. He
spoke Greek with ease and freedom. Placed, as he was, on the margin where
the civilizations of the East and the West were brought in contact, he was
at once a barbarian potentate and an ambitious European politician. He was
well informed of the state of Rome, and saw reason, perhaps, as well he
might, to doubt the durability of its power. At any rate, he was no sooner
fixed on his own throne than he began to annex the territories of the
adjoining princes. He advanced his sea frontier through Armenia to Batoum,
and thence along the coast of Circassia. He occupied the Greek settlements
on the Sea of Azof. He took Kertch and the Crimea, and with the help of
pirates from the Mediterranean he formed a fleet which gave him complete
command of the Black Sea. In Asia Minor no power but the Roman could
venture to quarrel with him. The Romans ought in prudence to have
interfered before Mithridates had grown to so large a bulk, but money
judiciously distributed among the leading politicians had secured the
Senate's connivance; and they opened their eyes at last only when
Mithridates thought it unnecessary to subsidize them further, and directed
his proceedings against Cappadocia, which was immediately under Roman
protection. He invaded the country, killed the prince whom Rome had
recognized, and placed on the throne a child of his own, with the evident
intention of taking Cappadocia for himself.

This was to go too far. Like Jugurtha, he had purchased many friends in
the Senate, who, grateful for past favors and hoping for more, prevented
the adoption of violent measures against him; but they sent a message to
him that he must not have Cappadocia, and Mithridates, waiting for a
better opportunity, thought proper to comply. Of this message the bearer
was Lucius Sylla. He had time to study on the spot the problem of how to
deal with Asia Minor. He accomplished his mission with his usual
adroitness and apparent success, and he returned to Rome with new honors
to finish the Social war.

It was no easy work. The Samnites were tough and determined. For two years
they continued to struggle, and the contest was not yet over when news
came from the East appalling as the threatened Cimbrian invasion, which
brought both parties to consent to suspend their differences by mutual
concessions.

[1] I follow the ordinary date, which has been fixed by the positive
    statement that Caesar was fifty-six when he was killed, the date of
    his death being March, B.C. 44. Mommsen, however, argues plausibly
    for adding another two years to the beginning of Caesar's life, and
    brings him into the world at the time of the battle at Aix.




CHAPTER VII.


Barbarian kings, who found Roman senators ready to take bribes from them,
believed, not unnaturally, that the days of Roman dominion were numbered.
When the news of the Social war reached Mithridates, he thought it
needless to temporize longer, and he stretched out his hand to seize the
prize of the dominion of the East. The Armenians, who were at his
disposition, broke into Cappadocia and again overthrew the government,
which was in dependence upon Rome. Mithridates himself invaded Bithynia,
and replied to the remonstrances of the Roman authorities by a declaration
of open war. He called under arms the whole force of which he could
dispose; frightened rumor spoke of it as amounting to three hundred
thousand men. His corsair fleets poured down through the Dardanelles into
the archipelago; and so detested had the Roman governors made themselves
by their extortion and injustice that not only all the islands, but the
provinces on the continent, Ionia, Lydia, and Caria, rose in revolt. The
rebellion was preconcerted and simultaneous. The Roman residents,
merchants, bankers, farmers of the taxes, they and all their families,
were set upon and murdered; a hundred and fifty thousand men, women, and
children were said to have been destroyed in a single day. If we divide by
ten, as it is generally safe to do with historical round numbers, still
beyond doubt the signal had been given in an appalling massacre to abolish
out of Asia the Roman name and power. Swift as a thunderbolt Mithridates
himself crossed the Bosphorus, and the next news that reached Rome was
that northern Greece had risen also and was throwing itself into the arms
of its deliverers.

The defeat at Cannae had been received with dignified calm. Patricians and
plebeians forgot their quarrels and thought only how to meet their common
foe. The massacre in Asia and the invasion of Mithridates let loose a
tempest of political frenzy. Never was indignation more deserved. The
Senate had made no preparation. Such resources as they could command had
been wasted in the wars with the Italians. They had no fleet, they had no
armies available; nor, while the civil war was raging, could they raise an
army. The garrisons in Greece were scattered or shut in within their lines
and unable to move. The treasury was empty. Individuals were enormously
rich and the State was bankrupt. Thousands of families had lost brothers,
cousins, or friends in the massacre, and the manifest cause of the
disaster was the inefficiency and worthlessness of the ruling classes. In
Africa, in Gaul, in Italy, and now in Asia it had been the same story. The
interests of the Commonwealth had been sacrificed to fill the purses of
the few. Dominion, wealth, honors, all that had been won by the hardy
virtues of earlier generations, seemed about to be engulfed forever.

In their panic the Senate turned to Sylla, whom they had made consul. An
imperfect peace was patched up with the Italians. Sylla was bidden to save
the Republic and to prepare in haste for Greece. But Sylla was a bitter
aristocrat, the very incarnation of the oligarchy, who were responsible
for every disaster which had happened. The Senate had taken bribes from
Jugurtha. The Senate had chosen the commanders whose blunders had thrown
open the Alps to the Germans; and it was only because the people had
snatched the power out of their hands and had trusted it to one of
themselves that Italy had not been in flames. Again the oligarchy had
recovered the administration, and again by following the old courses they
had brought on this new catastrophe. They might have checked Mithridates
while there was time. They had preferred to accept his money and look on.
The people naturally thought that no successes could be looked for under
such guidance, and that even were Sylla to be victorious, nothing was to
be expected but the continuance of the same accursed system. Marius was
the man. Marius after his sixth consulship had travelled in the East, and
understood it as well as Sylla. Not Sylla but Marius must now go against
Mithridates. Too late the democratic leaders repented of their folly in
encouraging the Senate to refuse the franchise to the Italians. The
Italians, they began to perceive, would be their surest political allies.
Caius Gracchus had been right after all. The Roman democracy must make
haste to offer the Italians more than all which the Senate was ready to
concede to them. Together they could make an end of misrule and place
Marius once more at their head.

Much of this was perhaps the scheming passion of revolution; much of it
was legitimate indignation, penitent for its errors and anxious to atone
for them. Marius had his personal grievances. The aristocrats were
stealing from him even his military reputation, and claiming for Sylla the
capture of Jugurtha. He was willing, perhaps anxious, to take the Eastern
command. Sulpicius Rufus, once a champion of the Senate and the most
brilliant orator in Rome, went over to the people in the excitement. Rufus
was chosen tribune, and at once proposed to enfranchise the remainder of
Italy. He denounced the oligarchy. He insisted that the Senate must be
purged of its corrupt members and better men be introduced, that the
people must depose Sylla, and that Marius must take his place. The Empire
was tottering, and the mob and its leaders were choosing an ill moment for
a revolution. The tribune carried the assembly along with him. There were
fights again in the Forum, the young nobles with their gangs once more
breaking up the Comitia and driving the people from the voting-places. The
voting, notwithstanding, was got through as Sulpicius Rufus recommended,
and Sylla, so far as the assembly could do it, was superseded. But Sylla
was not so easily got rid of. It was no time for nice considerations. He
had formed an army in Campania out of the legions which had served against
the Italians. He had made his soldiers devoted to him. They were ready to
go anywhere and do anything which Sylla bade them. After so many murders
and so many commotions, the constitution had lost its sacred character; a
popular assembly was, of all conceivable bodies, the least fit to govern
an empire; and in Sylla's eyes the Senate, whatever its deficiencies, was
the only possible sovereign of Rome. The people were a rabble, and their
voices the clamor of fools, who must be taught to know their masters. His
reply to Sulpicius and to the vote for his recall was to march on the
city. He led his troops within the circle which no legionary in arms was
allowed to enter, and he lighted his watch-fires in the Forum itself. The
people resisted; Sulpicius was killed; Marius, the saviour of his country,
had to fly for his life, pursued by assassins, with a price set upon his
head. Twelve of the prominent popular leaders were immediately executed
without trial, and in hot haste swift decisive measures were taken which
permanently, as Sylla hoped, or if not permanently at least for the
moment, would lame the limbs of the democracy. The Senate, being below its
numbers, was hastily filled up from the patrician families. The
arrangements of the Comitia were readjusted to restore to wealth a
decisive preponderance in the election of the magistrates. The tribunes of
the people were stripped of half their power. Their veto was left to them,
but the right of initiation was taken away, and no law or measure of any
kind was thenceforth to be submitted to the popular assembly till it had
been considered in the Curia and had received the Senate's sanction.

Thus the snake was scotched, and it might be hoped would die of its
wounds. Sulpicius and his brother demagogues were dead. Marius was exiled.
Time pressed, and Sylla could not wait to see his reforms in operation.
Signs became visible before he went that the crisis would not pass off so
easily. Fresh consuls had to be elected. The changes in the method of
voting were intended to secure the return of the Senate's candidates, and
one of the consuls chosen, Cnaeus Octavius, was a man on whom Sylla could
rely. His colleague, Lucius Cinna, though elected under the pressure of
the legions, was of more doubtful temper. But Cinna was a patrician,
though given to popular sentiments. Sylla was impatient to be gone; more
important work was waiting for him than composing factions in Rome. He
contented himself with obliging the new consuls to take an oath to
maintain the constitution in the shape in which he left it, and he sailed
from Brindisi in the winter of B.C. 88.

The campaign of Sylla in the East does not fall to be described in this
place. He was a second Coriolanus, a proud, imperious aristocrat,
contemptuous, above all men living, of popular rights; but he was the
first soldier of his age; he was himself, though he did not know it, an
impersonation of the change which was passing over the Roman character. He
took with him at most 30,000 men. He had no fleet. Had the corsair
squadrons of Mithridates been on the alert, they might have destroyed him
on his passage. Events at Rome left him almost immediately without support
from Italy. He was impeached; he was summoned back. His troops were
forbidden to obey him, and a democratic commander was sent out to
supersede him. The army stood by their favorite commander. Sylla
disregarded his orders from home. He found men and money as he could. He
supported himself out of the countries which he occupied, without
resources save in his own skill and in the fidelity and excellence of his
legions. He defeated Mithridates, he drove him back out of Greece and
pursued him into Asia. The interests of his party demanded his presence at
Rome; the interests of the State required that he should not leave his
work in the East unfinished, and he stood to it through four hard years
till he brought Mithridates to sue for peace upon his knees. He had not
the means to complete the conquest or completely to avenge the massacre
with which the Prince of Pontus had commenced the war. He left Mithridates
still in possession of his hereditary kingdom, but he left him bound, so
far as treaties could bind so ambitious a spirit, to remain thenceforward
within his own frontiers. He recovered Greece and the islands, and the
Roman provinces in Asia Minor. He extorted an indemnity of five millions,
and executed many of the wretches who had been active in the murders. He
raised a fleet in Egypt, with which he drove the pirates out of the
archipelago back into their own waters. He restored the shattered prestige
of Roman authority, and he won for himself a reputation which his later
cruelties might stain but could not efface.

The merit of Sylla shows in more striking colors when we look to what was
passing, during these four years of his absence, in the heart of the
Empire. He was no sooner out of Italy than the democratic party rose, with
Cinna at their head, to demand the restoration of the old constitution.
Cinna had been sworn to maintain Sylla's reforms, but no oath could be
held binding which was extorted at the sword's point. A fresh Sulpicius
was found in Carbo, a popular tribune. A more valuable supporter was found
in Quintus Sertorius, a soldier of fortune, but a man of real gifts, and
even of genius. Disregarding the new obligation to obtain the previous
consent of the Senate, Cinna called the assembly together to repeal the
acts which Sylla had forced on them. Sylla, it is to be remembered, had as
yet won no victories, nor was expected to win victories. He was the
favorite of the Senate, and the Senate had become a byword for incapacity
and failure. Again, as so many times before, the supremacy of the
aristocrats had been accompanied with dishonor abroad and the lawless
murder of political adversaries at home. No true lover of his country
could be expected, in Cinna's opinion, to sit quiet under a tyranny which
had robbed the people of their hereditary liberties.

The patricians took up the challenge. Octavius, the other consul, came
with an armed force into the Forum, and ordered the assembly to disperse.
The crowd was unusually great. The country voters had come in large
numbers to stand up for their rights. They did not obey, They were not
called on to obey. But because they refused to disperse they were set upon
with deliberate fury, and were hewn down in heaps where they stood. No
accurate register was, of course, taken of the numbers killed; but the
intention of the patricians was to make a bloody example, and such a scene
of slaughter had never been witnessed in Rome since the first stone of the
city was laid. It was an act of savage, ruthless ferocity, certain to be
followed with a retribution as sharp and as indiscriminating. Men are not
permitted to deal with their fellow-creatures in these methods. Cinna and
the tribunes fled, but fled only to be received with open arms by the
Italians. The wounds of the Social war were scarcely cicatrized, and the
peace had left the allies imperfectly satisfied. Their dispersed armies
gathered again about Cinna and Sertorius. Old Marius, who had been hunted
through marsh and forest, and had been hiding with difficulty in Africa,
came back at the news that Italy had risen again; and six thousand of his
veterans flocked to him at the sound of his name. The Senate issued
proclamations. The limitations on the Italian franchise left by Sylla were
abandoned. Every privilege which had been asked for was conceded. It was
too late. Concessions made in fear might be withdrawn on the return of
safety. Marius and Cinna joined their forces. The few troops in the pay of
the Senate deserted to them. They appeared together at the gate's of the
city, and Rome capitulated.

There was a bloody score to be wiped out. There would have been neither
cruelty nor injustice in the most severe inquiry into the massacre in the
Forum, and the most exemplary punishment of Octavius and his companions.
But the blood of the people was up, and they had suffered too deeply to
wait for the tardy processes of law. They had not been the aggressors.
They had assembled lawfully, to assert their constitutional rights; they
had been cut in pieces as if they had been insurgent slaves, and the
assassins were not individuals, but a political party in the State.

Marius bears the chief blame for the scenes which followed. Undoubtedly he
was in no pleasant humor. A price had been set on his head, his house had
been destroyed, his property had been confiscated, he himself had been
chased like a wild beast, and he had not deserved such treatment. He had
saved Italy when but for him it would have been wasted by the swords of
the Germans. His power had afterward been absolute, but he had not abused
it for party purposes. The Senate had no reason to complain of him. He had
touched none of their privileges, incapable and dishonest as he knew them
to be. His crime in their eyes had been his eminence. They had now shown
themselves as cruel as they were worthless; and if public justice was
disposed to make an end of them, he saw no cause for interference.

Thus the familiar story repeated itself; wrong was punished by wrong, and
another item was entered on the bloody account which was being scored up
year after year. The noble lords and their friends had killed the people
in the Forum. They were killed in turn by the soldiers of Marius. Fifty
senators perished; not those who were specially guilty, but those who were
most politically marked as patrician leaders. With them fell a thousand
equites, commoners of fortune, who had thrown in their lot with the
aristocracy. From retaliatory political revenge the transition was easy to
pillage and wholesale murder, and for many days the wretched city was made
a prey to robbers and cutthroats.

So ended the year 87, the darkest and bloodiest which the guilty city had
yet experienced. Marius and Cinna were chosen consuls for the year
ensuing, and a witch's prophecy was fulfilled that Marius should have a
seventh consulate. But the glory had departed from him. His sun was
already setting, redly, among crimson clouds. He lived but a fortnight
after his inauguration, and he died in his bed on the 13th of January, at
the age of seventy-one.

"The mother of the Gracchi," said Mirabeau, "cast the dust of her murdered
sons into the air, and out of it sprang Caius Marius." The Gracchi were
perhaps not forgotten in the retribution; but the crime which had been
revenged by Marius was the massacre in the Forum by Octavius and his
friends. The aristocracy found no mercy, because they had shown no mercy.
They had been guilty of the most wantonly wicked cruelty which the Roman
annals had yet recorded. They were not defending their country against a
national danger. They were engaged in what has been called in later years
"saving society;" that is to say, in saving their own privileges, their
opportunities for plunder, their palaces, their estates, and their
game-preserves. They had treated the people as if they were so many cattle
grown troublesome to their masters, and the cattle were human beings with
rights as real as their own.

The democratic party were now masters of the situation, and so continued
for almost four years. Cinna succeeded to the consulship term after term,
nominating himself and his colleagues. The franchise was given to the
Italians without reserve or qualification. Northern Italy was still
excluded, being not called Italy, but Cisalpine Gaul. South of the Po
distinctions of citizenship ceased to exist. The constitution became a
rehearsal of the Empire, a democracy controlled and guided by a popular
dictator. The aristocrats who had escaped massacre fled to Sylla in Asia,
and for a brief interval Rome drew its breath in peace.




CHAPTER VIII.


Revolutionary periods are painted in history in colors so dark that the
reader wonders how, amidst such scenes, peaceful human beings could
continue to exist. He forgets that the historian describes only the
abnormal incidents which broke the current of ordinary life, and that
between the spasms of violence there were long quiet intervals when the
ordinary occupations of men went on as usual. Cinna's continuous
consulship was uncomfortable to the upper classes, but the daily business
of a great city pursued its beaten way. Tradesmen and merchants made
money, and lawyers pleaded, and priests prayed in the temples, and
"celebrated" on festival and holy day. And now for the first time we catch
a personal view of young Julius Caesar. He was growing up, in his father's
house, a tall, slight, handsome youth, with dark piercing eyes,[1] a
sallow complexion, large nose, lips full, features refined and
intellectual, neck sinewy and thick beyond what might have been expected
from the generally slender figure. He was particular about his appearance,
used the bath frequently, and attended carefully to his hair. His dress
was arranged with studied negligence, and he had a loose mode of fastening
his girdle so peculiar as to catch the eye.

It may be supposed that he had witnessed Sylla's coming to Rome, the camp-
fires in the Forum, the Octavian massacre, the return of his uncle and
Cinna, and the bloody triumph of the party to which his father belonged.
He was just at the age when such scenes make an indelible impression; and
the connection of his family with Marius suggests easily the persons whom
he must have most often seen, and the conversation to which he must have
listened at his father's table. His most intimate companions were the
younger Marius, the adopted son of his uncle; and, singularly enough, the
two Ciceros, Marcus and his brother Quintus, who had been sent by their
father to be educated at Rome. The connection of Marius with Arpinum was
perhaps the origin of the intimacy. The great man may have heard of his
fellow-townsman's children being in the city, and have taken notice of
them. Certain, at any rate, it is that these boys grew up together on
terms of close familiarity.[2]

Marius had observed his nephew, and had marked him for promotion. During
the brief fortnight of his seventh consulship he gave him an appointment
which reminds us of the boy-bishops of the middle ages. He made him
_flamen dialis_, or priest of Jupiter, and a member of the Sacred
College, with a handsome income, when he was no more than fourteen. Two
years later, during the rule of Cinna, his father arranged a marriage for
him with a lady of fortune named Cossutia. But the young Caesar had more
ambitious views for himself. His father died suddenly at Pisa, in B.C. 84;
he used his freedom to break off his engagement, and instead of Cossutia
he married Cornelia, the daughter of no less a person than the all-
powerful Cinna himself. If the date commonly received for Caesar's birth
is correct, he was still only in his seventeenth year. Such connections
were rarely formed at an age so premature; and the doubt is increased by
the birth of his daughter, Julia, in the year following. Be this as it
may, a marriage into Cinna's family connected Caesar more closely than
ever with the popular party. Thus early and thus definitively he committed
himself to the politics of his uncle and his father-in-law; and the
comparative quiet which Rome and Italy enjoyed under Cinna's
administration may have left a permanent impression upon him.

The quiet was not destined to be of long endurance. The time was come when
Sylla was to demand a reckoning for all which had been done in his
absence. No Roman general had deserved better of his country than Sylla.
He had driven Mithridates out of Greece, and had restored Roman authority
in Asia under conditions peculiarly difficult. He had clung resolutely to
his work, while his friends at home were being trampled upon by the
populace whom he despised. He perhaps knew that in subduing the enemies of
the State by his own individual energy he was taking the surest road to
regain his ascendency. His task was finished. Mithridates was once more a
petty Asiatic prince existing upon sufferance, and Sylla announced his
approaching return to Italy. By his victories he had restored confidence
to the aristocracy, and had won the respect of millions of his countrymen.
But the party in power knew well that if he gained a footing in Italy
their day was over, and the danger to be expected from him was aggravated
by his transcendent services. The Italians feared naturally that they
would lose the liberties which they had won. The popular faction at Rome
was combined and strong, and was led by men of weight and practical
ability. No reconciliation was possible between Cinna and Sylla. They were
the respective chiefs of heaven and hell, and which of the two represented
the higher power and which the lower could be determined only when the
sword had decided between them. In Cinna lay the presumed lawful
authority. He represented the people as organized in the Comitia, and his
colleague in the consulship when the crisis came was the popular tribune
Carbo. Italy was ready with armies; and as leaders there were young
Marius, already with a promise of greatness in him, and Sertorius, gifted,
brilliant, unstained by crime, adored by his troops as passionately as
Sylla himself, and destined to win a place for himself elsewhere in the
Pantheon of Rome's most distinguished men.

Sylla had measured the difficulty of the task which lay before him. But he
had an army behind him accustomed to victory, and recruited by thousands
of exiles who had fled from the rule of the democracy. He had now a fleet
to cover his passage; and he was watching the movements of his enemies
before deciding upon his own, when accident came suddenly to his help.
Cinna had gone down to Brindisi, intending himself to carry his army into
Greece, and to spare Italy the miseries of another civil war, by fighting
it out elsewhere. The expedition was unpopular with the soldiers, and
Cinna was killed in a mutiny. The democracy was thus left without a head,
and the moderate party in the city who desired peace and compromise used
the opportunity to elect two neutral consuls, Scipio and Norbanus. Sylla,
perhaps supposing the change of feeling to be more complete than it really
was, at once opened communications with them. But his terms were such as
he might have dictated if the popular party were already under his feet.
He intended to re-enter Rome with the glory of his conquests about him,
for revenge and a counter-revolution. The consuls replied with refusing to
treat with a rebel in arms, and with a command to disband his troops.

Sylla had lingered at Athens, collecting paintings and statues and
manuscripts, the rarest treasures on which he could lay his hands, to
decorate his Roman palace. On receiving the consuls' answer, he sailed for
Brindisi in the spring of 83, with forty thousand legionaries and a large
fleet. The south of Italy made no resistance, and he secured a standing-
ground where his friends could rally to him. They came in rapidly, some
for the cause which he represented, some for private hopes or animosities,
some as aspiring military adventurers, seeking the patronage of the
greatest soldier of the age. Among these last came Cnaeus Pompey,
afterward Pompey the Great, son of Pompey, surnamed Strabo, or the squint-
eyed, either from some personal deformity or because he had trimmed
between the two factions and was distrusted and hated by them both.

Cnaeus Pompey had been born in the same year with Cicero, and was now
twenty-three. He was a high--spirited ornamental youth, with soft melting
eyes, as good as he was beautiful, and so delightful to women that it was
said they all longed to bite him. The Pompeys had been hardly treated by
Cinna. The father had been charged with embezzlement. The family house in
Rome had been confiscated; the old Strabo had been killed; the son had
retired to his family estate in Picenum,[3] where he was living when Sylla
landed. To the young Roman chivalry Sylla was a hero of romance. Pompey
raised a legion out of his friends and tenants, scattered the few
companies that tried to stop him, and rushed to the side of the deliverer.
Others came, like Sergius Catiline or Oppianicus of Larino,[4] men steeped
in crime, stained with murder, incest, adultery, forgery, and meaning to
secure the fruits of their villanies by well-timed service. They were all
welcome, and Sylla was not particular. His progress was less rapid than it
promised to be at the outset. He easily defeated Norbanus; and Scipio's
troops, having an aristocratic leaven in them, deserted to him. But the
Italians, especially the Samnites, fought most desperately. The war lasted
for more than a year, Sylla slowly advancing. The Roman mob became
furious. They believed their cause betrayed, and were savage from fear and
disappointment. Suspected patricians were murdered: among them fell the
Pontifex Maximus, the venerable Scaevola. At length the contest ended in a
desperate fight under the walls of Rome itself on the 1st of November,
B.C. 82. The battle began at four in the afternoon, and lasted through the
night to the dawn of the following day. The popular army was at last cut
to pieces; a few thousand prisoners were taken, but they were murdered
afterward in cold blood. Young Marius killed himself, Sertorius fled to
Spain, and Sylla and the aristocracy were masters of Rome and Italy. Such
provincial towns as continued to resist were stormed and given up to
pillage, every male inhabitant being put to the sword. At Norba, in
Latium, the desperate citizens fired their own houses and perished by each
other's hands.

Sylla was under no illusions. He understood the problem which he had in
hand. He knew that the aristocracy were detested by nine tenths of the
people; he knew that they deserved to be detested; but they were at least
gentlemen by birth and breeding. The democrats, on the other hand, were
insolent upstarts, who, instead of being grateful for being allowed to
live and work and pay taxes and serve in the army, had dared to claim a
share in the government, had turned against their masters, and had set
their feet upon their necks. The miserable multitude were least to blame.
They were ignorant, and without leaders could be controlled easily. The
guilt and the danger lay with the men of wealth and intellect, the country
gentlemen, the minority of knights and patricians like Cinna, who had
taken the popular side and had deserted their own order. Their motives
mattered not; some might have acted from foolish enthusiasm, some from
personal ambition; but such traitors, from the Gracchi onward, had caused
all the mischief which had happened to the State. They were determined,
they were persevering. No concessions had satisfied them, and one demand
had been a prelude to another. There was no hope for an end of agitation
till every one of these men had been rooted out, their estates taken from
them, and their families destroyed.

To this remarkable work Sylla addressed himself, unconscious that he was
attempting an impossibility, that opinion could not be controlled by the
sword, and that for every enemy to the oligarchy that he killed he would
create twenty by his cruelty. Like Marius after the Octavian massacre, he
did not attempt to distinguish between degrees of culpability. Guilt was
not the question with him. His object was less to punish the past than to
prevent a recurrence of it, and moderate opposition was as objectionable
as fanaticism and frenzy. He had no intention of keeping power in his own
hands. Personal supremacy might end with himself, and he intended to
create institutions which would endure, in the form of a close senatorial
monopoly. But for his purpose it would be necessary to remove out of the
way every single person either in Rome or in the provinces who was in a
position to offer active resistance, and therefore for the moment he
required complete freedom of action. The Senate at his direction appointed
him dictator, and in this capacity he became absolute master of the life
and property of every man and woman in Italy. He might be impeached
afterward and his policy reversed, but while his office lasted he could do
what he pleased.

He at once outlawed every magistrate, every public servant of any kind,
civil or municipal, who had held office under the rule of Cinna. Lists
were drawn for him of the persons of wealth and consequence all over Italy
who belonged to the liberal party. He selected agents whom he could trust,
or supposed he could trust, to enter the names for each district. He
selected, for instance, Oppianicus of Larino, who inscribed individuals
whom he had already murdered, and their relations whose prosecution he
feared. It mattered little to Sylla who were included, if none escaped who
were really dangerous to him; and an order was issued for the slaughter of
the entire number, the confiscation of their property, and the division of
it between the informers and Sylla's friends and soldiers. Private
interest was thus called in to assist political animosity, and to
stimulate the zeal for assassination a reward of L500 was offered for the
head of any person whose name was in the schedule.

It was one of those deliberate acts, carried out with method and order,
which are possible only in countries in an advanced stage of civilization,
and which show how thin is the film spread over human ferocity by what is
called progress and culture. We read in every page of history of invasions
of hostile armies, of towns and villages destroyed and countries wasted
and populations perishing of misery; the simplest war brings a train of
horrors behind it; but we bear them with comparative equanimity. Personal
hatreds are not called out on such occasions. The actors in them are
neither necessarily nor generally fiends. The grass grows again on the
trampled fields. Peace returns, and we forget and forgive. The coldly
ordered massacres of selected victims in political and spiritual struggles
rise in a different order of feelings, and are remembered through all ages
with indignation and shame. The victims perish as the champions of
principles which survive through the changes of time. They are marked for
the sacrifice on account of their advocacy of a cause which to half
mankind is the cause of humanity. They are the martyrs of history, and the
record of atrocity rises again in immortal witness against the opinions
out of which it rose.

Patricians and plebeians, aristocrats and democrats, have alike stained
their hands with blood in the working out of the problem of politics. But
impartial history declares also that the crimes of the popular party have
in all ages been the lighter in degree, while in themselves they have more
to excuse them; and if the violent acts of revolutionists have been held
up more conspicuously for condemnation, it has been only because the fate
of noblemen and gentlemen has been more impressive to the imagination than
the fate of the peasant or the artisan. But the endurance of the
inequalities of life by the poor is the marvel of human society. When the
people complain, said Mirabeau, the people are always right. The popular
cause has been the cause of the laborer struggling for a right to live and
breathe and think as a man. Aristocracies fight for wealth and power,
wealth which they waste upon luxury, and power which they abuse for
their own interests. Yet the cruelties of Marius were as far exceeded by
the cruelties of Sylla as the insurrection of the beggars of Holland was
exceeded by the bloody tribunal of the Duke of Alva, or as "the horrors of
the French Revolution" were exceeded by the massacre of the Huguenots two
hundred years before, for which the Revolution was the expiatory
atonement.

Four thousand seven hundred persons fell in the proscription of Sylla, all
men of education and fortune. The real crime of many of them was the
possession of an estate or a wife which a relative or a neighbor coveted.
The crime alleged against all was the opinion that the people of Rome and
Italy had rights which deserved consideration as well as the senators and
nobles. The liberal party were extinguished in their own blood. Their
estates were partitioned into a hundred and twenty thousand allotments,
which were distributed among Sylla's friends, or soldiers, or freedmen.
The land reform of the Gracchi was mockingly adopted to create a permanent
aristocratic garrison. There were no trials, there were no pardons. Common
report or private information was at once indictment and evidence, and
accusation was in itself condemnation.

The ground being thus cleared, the Dictator took up again his measures of
political reform. He did not attempt a second time to take the franchise
from the Italians. Romans and Italians he was ready to leave on the same
level, but it was to be a level of impotence. Rome was to be ruled by the
Senate, and as a first step, and to protect the Senate's dignity, he
enfranchised ten thousand slaves who had belonged to the proscribed
gentlemen, and formed them into a senatorial guard. Before departing for
the East he had doubled the Senate's numbers out of the patrician order.
Under Cinna the new members had not claimed their privilege, and had
probably been absent from Italy. They were now installed in their places,
and the power of the censors to revise the list and remove those who had
proved unworthy was taken away. The senators were thus peers for life,
peers in a single chamber which Sylla meant to make omnipotent. Vacancies
were to be supplied as before from the retiring consuls, praetors,
aediles, and quaestors. The form of a popular constitution would remain,
since the road into the council of State lay through the popular
elections. But to guard against popular favorites finding access to the
consulship, a provision was made that no person who had been a tribune of
the people could be chosen afterward to any other office.

The Senate's power depended on the withdrawal from the assembly of
citizens of the right of original legislation. So long as the citizens
could act immediately at the invitation of either consul or tribune, they
could repeal at their pleasure any arrangement which Sylla might
prescribe. As a matter of course, therefore, he re-enacted the condition
which restricted the initiation of laws to the Senate. The tribunes still
retained their veto, but a penalty was attached to the abuse of the veto,
the Senate being the judge in its own cause, and possessing a right to
depose a tribune.

In the Senate so reconstituted was thus centred a complete restrictive
control over the legislation and the administration. And this was not all.
The senators had been so corrupt in the use of their judicial functions
that Gracchus had disabled them from sitting in the law courts, and had
provided that the judges should be chosen in future from the equites. The
knights had been exceptionally pure in their office. Cicero challenged his
opponents on the trial of Verres[5] to find a single instance in which an
equestrian court could be found to have given a corrupt verdict during the
forty years for which their privilege survived. But their purity did not
save them, nor, alas! those who were to suffer by a reversion to the old
order. The equestrian courts were abolished: the senatorial courts were
reinstated. It might be hoped that the senators had profited by their
lesson, and for the future would be careful of their reputation.

Changes were made also in the modes of election to office. The College of
Priests had been originally a close corporation, which filled up its own
numbers. Democracy had thrown it open to competition, and given the choice
to the people. Sylla reverted to the old rule. Consuls like Marius and
Cinna, who had the confidence of the people, had been re-elected year
after year, and had been virtual kings. Sylla provided that ten years must
elapse between a first consulship and a second. Nor was any one to be a
consul who was not forty-three years old and had not passed already
through the lower senatorial offices of praetor or quaestor.

The assembly of the people had been shorn of its legislative powers. There
was no longer, therefore, any excuse for its meeting, save on special
occasions. To leave the tribunes power to call the citizens to the Forum
was to leave them the means of creating inconvenient agitation. It was
ordered, therefore, that the assembly should only come together at the
Senate's invitation. The free grants of corn, which filled the city with
idle vagrants, were abolished. Sylla never courted popularity, and never
shrank from fear of clamor.

The Senate was thus made omnipotent and irresponsible. It had the
appointment of all the governors of the provinces. It was surrounded by
its own body-guard. It had the administration completely in hand. The
members could be tried only by their peers, and were themselves judges of
every other order. No legal force was left anywhere to interfere with what
it might please them to command. A senator was not necessarily a
patrician, nor a patrician a senator. The Senate was,[6] or was to be as
time wore on, a body composed of men of any order who had secured the
suffrages of the people. But as the value of the prize became so vast, the
way to the possession of it was open practically to those only who had
wealth or interest. The elections came to be worked by organized
committees, and except in extraordinary circumstances no candidate could
expect success who had not the Senate's support, or who had not bought the
services of the managers, at a cost within the reach only of the reckless
spendthrift or the speculating millionaire.

What human foresight could do to prevent democracy from regaining the
ascendency, Sylla had thus accomplished. He had destroyed the opposition;
he had reorganized the constitution on the most strictly conservative
lines. He had built the fortress, as he said; it was now the Senate's part
to provide a garrison; and here it was, as Caesar said afterward, that
Sylla had made his great mistake. His arrangements were ingenious, and
many of them excellent; but the narrower the body to whose care the
government was entrusted, the more important became the question of the
composition of this body. The theory of election implied that they would
be the best that the Republic possessed; but Sylla must have been himself
conscious that fact and theory might be very far from corresponding.

The key of the situation was the army. As before, no troops were to be
maintained in Italy; but beyond the frontiers the provinces were held by
military force, and the only power which could rule the Empire was the
power which the army would obey. It was not for the Senate's sake that
Sylla's troops had followed him from Greece. It was from their personal
devotion to himself. What charm was there in this new constructed
aristocratic oligarchy, that distant legions should defer to it--more than
Sylla's legions had deferred to orders from Cinna and Carbo? Symptoms of
the danger from this quarter were already growing even under the
Dictator's own eyes, and at the height of his authority. Sertorius had
escaped the proscription. After wandering in Africa he made his way into
Spain, where, by his genius as a statesman and a soldier, he rose into a
position to defy the Senate and assert his independence. He organized the
peninsula after the Roman model; he raised armies, and defeated commander
after commander who was sent to reduce him. He revived in the Spaniards a
national enthusiasm for freedom. The Roman legionaries had their own
opinions, and those whose friends Sylla had murdered preferred Sertorius
and liberty to Rome and an aristocratic Senate. Unconquerable by honorable
means, Sertorius was poisoned at last. But his singular history suggests a
doubt whether, if the Syllan constitution had survived, other Sertoriuses
might not have sprung up in every province, and the Empire of Rome have
gone to pieces like the Macedonian. The one condition of the continuance
of the Roman dominion was the existence of a central authority which the
army as a profession could respect, and the traditionary reverence which
attached to the Roman Senate would scarcely have secured their
disinterested attachment to five hundred elderly rich men who had bought
their way into pre-eminence.

Sylla did not live to see the significance of the Sertorian revolt. He
experienced, however, himself, in a milder form, an explosion of military
sauciness. Young Pompey had been sent, after the occupation of Rome, to
settle Sicily and Africa. He did his work well and rapidly, and when it
was over he received orders from the Senate to dismiss his troops. An
order from Sylla Pompey would have obeyed; but what was the Senate, that
an ambitious brilliant youth with arms in his hands should send away an
army devoted to him and step back into common life? Sylla himself had to
smooth the ruffled plumes of his aspiring follower. He liked Pompey, he
was under obligations to him, and Pompey had not acted after all in a
manner so very unlike his own. He summoned him home, but he gave him a
triumph for his African conquests, and allowed him to call himself by the
title of "_Magnus_," or "_The Great_." Pompey was a promising
soldier, without political ambition, and was worth an effort to secure. To
prevent the risk of a second act of insubordination, Sylla made personal
arrangements to attach Pompey directly to himself. He had a step-daughter,
named Aemilia. She was already married, and was pregnant. Pompey too was
married to Antistia, a lady of good family; but domestic ties were not
allowed to stand in the way of higher objects. Nor did it matter that
Antistia's father had been murdered by the Roman populace for taking
Sylla's side, or that her mother had gone mad and destroyed herself, on
her husband's horrible death. Late Republican Rome was not troubled with
sentiment. Sylla invited Pompey to divorce Antistia and marry Aemilia.
Pompey complied. Antistia was sent away. Aemilia was divorced from her
husband, and was brought into Pompey's house, where she immediately died.

In another young man of high rank, whom Sylla attempted to attach to
himself by similar means, he found less complaisance. Caesar was now
eighteen, his daughter Julia having been lately born. He had seen his
party ruined, his father-in-law and young Marius killed, and his nearest
friends dispersed or murdered. He had himself for a time escaped
proscription; but the Dictator had his eye on him, and Sylla had seen
something in "the youth with the loose girdle" which struck him as
remarkable. Closely connected though Caesar was both with Cinna and
Marius, Sylla did not wish to kill him if he could help it. There was a
cool calculation in his cruelties. The existing generation of democrats
was incurable, but he knew that the stability of the new constitution must
depend on his being able to conciliate the intellect and energy of the
next. Making a favor perhaps of his clemency, he proposed to Caesar to
break with his liberal associates, divorce Cinna's daughter, and take such
a wife as he would himself provide. If Pompey had complied, who had made a
position of his own, much more might it be expected that Caesar would
comply. Yet Caesar answered with a distinct and unhesitating refusal. The
terrible Sylla, in the fulness of his strength, after desolating half the
homes in Italy, after revolutionizing all Roman society, from the
peasant's cottage in the Apennines to the senate-house itself, was defied
by a mere boy! Throughout his career Caesar displayed always a singular
indifference to life. He had no sentimental passion about him, no Byronic
mock-heroics. He had not much belief either in God or the gods. On all
such questions he observed from first to last a profound silence. But one
conviction he had. He intended, if he was to live at all, to live master
of himself in matters which belonged to himself. Sylla might kill him if
he so pleased. It was better to die than to put away a wife who was the
mother of his child, and to marry some other woman at a dictator's
bidding. Life on such terms was not worth keeping.

So proud a bearing may have commanded Sylla's admiration, but it taught
him, also, that a young man capable of assuming an attitude so bold might
be dangerous to the rickety institutions which he had constructed so
carefully. He tried coercion. He deprived Caesar of his priesthood. He
took his wife's dowry from him, and confiscated the estate which he had
inherited from his father. When this produced no effect, the rebellious
youth was made over to the assassins, and a price was set upon his head.
He fled into concealment. He was discovered once, and escaped only by
bribing Sylla's satellites. His fate would soon have overtaken him, but he
had powerful relations, whom Sylla did not care to offend. Aurelius Cotta,
who was perhaps his mother's brother, Mamercus Aemilius, a distinguished
patrician, and singularly also the College of the Vestal Virgins,
interceded for his pardon. The Dictator consented at last, but with
prophetic reluctance. "Take him," he said at length, "since you will have
it so--but I would have you know that the youth for whom you are so
earnest will one day overthrow the aristocracy, for whom you and I have
fought so hardly; in this young Caesar there are many Mariuses." [7]
Caesar, not trusting too much to Sylla's forbearance, at once left Italy,
and joined the army in Asia. The little party of young men who had grown
up together now separated, to meet in the future on altered terms. Caesar
held to his inherited convictions, remaining constant through good and
evil to the cause of his uncle Marius. His companion Cicero, now ripening
into manhood, chose the other side. With his talents for his inheritance,
and confident in the consciousness of power, but with weak health and a
neck as thin as a woman's, Cicero felt that he had a future before him,
but that his successes must be won by other weapons than arms. He chose
the bar for his profession; he resolved to make his way into popularity as
a pleader before the Senate courts and in the Forum. He looked to the
Senate itself as the ultimate object of his ambition. There alone he could
hope to be distinguished, if distinguished he was to be.

Cicero, however, was no more inclined than Caesar to be subservient to
Sylla, as he took an early opportunity of showing. It was to the cause of
the constitution, and not to the person of the Dictator, that Cicero had
attached himself, and he, too, ventured to give free expression to his
thoughts when free speech was still dangerous.

Sylla's career was drawing to its close, and the end was not the least
remarkable feature of it. On him had fallen the odium of the proscription
and the stain of the massacres. The sooner the senators could be detached
from the soldier who had saved them from destruction, the better chance
they would have of conciliating quiet people on whose support they must
eventually rely. Sylla himself felt the position; and having completed
what he had undertaken, with a half-pitying, half-contemptuous self-
abandonment he executed what from the first he had intended--he resigned
the dictatorship, and became a private citizen again, amusing the leisure
of his age, as he had abused the leisure of his youth, with theatres and
actresses and dinner-parties. He too, like so many of the great Romans,
was indifferent to life; of power for the sake of power he was entirely
careless; and if his retirement had been more dangerous to him than it
really was, he probably would not have postponed it. He was a person of
singular character, and not without many qualities which were really
admirable. He was free from any touch of charlatanry. He was true, simple,
and unaffected, and even without ambition in the mean and personal sense.
His fault, which he would have denied to be a fault, was that he had a
patrician disdain of mobs and suffrages and the cant of popular liberty.
The type repeats itself era after era. Sylla was but Graham of Claverhouse
in a Roman dress and with an ampler stage. His courage in laying down his
authority has been often commented on, but the risk which he incurred was
insignificant. There was in Rome neither soldier nor statesman who could
for a moment be placed in competition with Sylla, and he was so
passionately loved by the army, he was so sure of the support of his
comrades, whom he had quartered on the proscribed lands, and who, for
their own interest's sake, would resist attempts at counter-revolution,
that he knew that if an emergency arose he had but to lift his finger to
reinstate himself in command. Of assassination he was in no greater danger
than when dictator, while the temptation to assassinate him was less. His
influence was practically undiminished, and as long as he lived he
remained, and could not but remain, the first person in the Republic.

Some license of speech he was, of course, prepared for, but it required no
small courage to make a public attack either on himself or his dependants,
and it was therefore most creditable to Cicero that his first speech of
importance was directed against the Dictator's immediate friends, and was
an exposure of the iniquities of the proscription. Cicero no doubt knew
that there would be no surer road to favor with the Roman multitude than
by denouncing Sylla's followers, and that, young and unknown as he was,
his insignificance might protect him, however far he ventured. But he had
taken the Senate's side. From first to last he had approved of the
reactionary constitution, and had only condemned the ruthless methods by
which it had been established. He never sought the popularity of a
demagogue, or appealed to popular passions, or attempted to create a
prejudice against the aristocracy, into whose ranks he intended to make
his way. He expressed the opinions of the respectable middle classes, who
had no sympathy with revolutionists, but who dreaded soldiers and military
rule and confiscations of property.

The occasion on which Cicero came forward was characteristic of the time.
Sextus Roscius was a country gentleman of good position, residing near
Ameria, in Umbria. He had been assassinated when on a visit to Rome by two
of his relations, who wished to get possession of his estate. The
proscription was over, and the list had been closed; but Roscius's name
was surreptitiously entered upon it, with the help of Sylla's favorite
freedman, Chrysogonus. The assassins obtained an acknowledgment of their
claims, and they and Chrysogonus divided the spoils. Sextus Roscius was
entirely innocent. He had taken no part in politics at all. He had left a
son who was his natural heir, and the township of Ameria sent up a
petition to Sylla remonstrating against so iniquitous a robbery. The
conspirators, finding themselves in danger of losing the reward of their
crime, shifted their ground. They denied that they had themselves killed
Sextus Roscius. They said that the son had done it, and they charged him
with parricide. Witnesses were easily provided. No influential pleader, it
was justly supposed, would venture into antagonism with Sylla's favorite
and appear for the defence. Cicero heard of the case, however, and used
the opportunity to bring himself into notice. He advocated young Roscius's
cause with skill and courage. He told the whole story in court without
disguise. He did not blame Sylla. He compared Sylla to Jupiter Optimus
Maximus, who was sovereign of the universe, and on the whole a good
sovereign, but with so much business on his hands that he had not time to
look into details. But Cicero denounced Chrysogonus as an accomplice in an
act of atrocious villainy. The court took the same view, and the rising
orator had the honor of clearing the reputation of the injured youth, and
of recovering his property for him.

Sylla showed no resentment, and probably felt none. He lived for a year
after his retirement, and died 78 B.C., being occupied at the moment in
writing his memoirs, which have been unfortunately lost. He was buried
gorgeously in the Campus Martius, among the old kings of Rome. The
aristocrats breathed freely when delivered from his overpowering presence,
and the constitution which he had set upon its feet was now to be tried.

[1] "Nigris vegetisque oculis."--Suetonius.

[2] "Ac primum illud tempus familiaritatis et consuetudinis, quae mihi cum
    illo, quae fratri meo, quae Caio Varroni, consobrino nostro, ab omnium
    nostrum adolescentia fuit, praetermitto."--Cicero, _De Provinciis
    Consularibus_, 17. Cicero was certainly speaking of a time which
    preceded Sylla's dictatorship, for Caesar left Rome immediately after
    it, and when he came back he attached himself to the political party
    to which Cicero was most opposed.

[3] On the Adriatic, between Anconia and Pescara.

[4] See, for the story of Oppianicus, the remarkable speech of Cicero,
    _Pro Cluentio_.

[5] Appian, on the other hand, says that the courts of the equites had
    been more corrupt than the senatorial courts.--_De Bello Civili,
    i_. 22. Cicero was perhaps prejudiced in favor of his own order,
    but a contemporary statement thus publicly made is far more likely to
    be trustworthy.

[6] Sylla had himself nominated a large number of senators.

[7] So says Suetonius, reporting the traditions of the following century;
    but the authority is doubtful, and the story, like so many others, is
    perhaps apocryphal.




CHAPTER IX.


The able men of the democracy had fallen in the proscription. Sertorius,
the only eminent surviving soldier belonging to them, was away, making
himself independent in Spain. The rest were all killed. But the Senate,
too, had lost in Sylla the single statesman that they possessed. They were
a body of mediocrities, left with absolute power in their hands, secure as
they supposed from further interference, and able to return to those
pleasant occupations which for a time had been so rudely interrupted.
Sertorius was an awkward problem with which Pompey might perhaps be
entrusted to deal. No one knew as yet what stuff might be in Pompey. He
was for the present sunning himself in his military splendors; too young
to come forward as a politician, and destitute, so far as appeared, of
political ambition. If Pompey promised to be docile, he might be turned to
use at a proper time; but the aristocracy had seen too much of successful
military commanders, and were in no hurry to give opportunities of
distinction to a youth who had so saucily defied them. Sertorius was far
off, and could be dealt with at leisure.

In his defence of Roscius, Cicero had given an admonition to the noble
lords that unless they mended their ways they could not look for any long
continuance.[1] They regarded Cicero perhaps, if they heard what he
said of them, as an inexperienced young man, who would understand better
by and by of what materials the world was made. There had been excitement
and anxiety enough. Conservatism was in power again. Fine gentlemen could
once more lounge in their clubs, amuse themselves with their fish-ponds
and horses and mistresses, devise new and ever new means of getting money
and spending it, and leave the Roman Empire for the present to govern
itself.

The leading public men belonging to the party in power had all served in
some capacity or other with Sylla or under him. Of those whose names
deserve particular mention there were at most five.

Licinius Lucullus had been a special favorite of Sylla. The Dictator left
him his executor, with the charge of his manuscripts. Lucullus was a
commoner, but of consular family, and a thorough-bred aristocrat. He had
endeared himself to Sylla by a languid talent which could rouse itself
when necessary into brilliant activity, by the easy culture of a polished
man of rank, and by a genius for luxury which his admirers followed at a
distance, imitating their master but hopeless of overtaking him.

Caecilius Metellus, son of the Metellus whom Marius had superseded in
Africa, had been consul with Sylla in 80 B.C. He was now serving in Spain
against Sertorius, and was being gradually driven out of the peninsula.

Lutatius Catulus was a proud but honest patrician, with the conceit of his
order, but without their vices. His father, who had been Marius's
colleague, and had been defeated by the Cimbri, had killed himself during
the Marian revolution. The son had escaped, and was one of the consuls at
the time of Sylla's death.

More noticeable than either of these was Marcus Crassus, a figure
singularly representative, of plebeian family, but a family long adopted
into the closest circle of the aristocracy, the leader and impersonation
of the great moneyed classes in Rome. Wealth had for several generations
been the characteristic of the Crassi. They had the instinct and the
temperament which in civilized ages take to money-making as a natural
occupation. In politics they aimed at being on the successful side; but
living as they did in an era of revolutions, they were surprised
occasionally in unpleasant situations. Crassus the rich, father of Marcus,
had committed himself against Marius, and had been allowed the privilege
of being his own executioner. Marcus himself, who was a little older than
Cicero, took refuge in Sylla's camp. He made himself useful to the
Dictator by his genius for finance, and in return he was enabled to amass
an enormous fortune for himself out of the proscriptions. His eye for
business reached over the whole Roman Empire. He was banker, speculator,
contractor, merchant. He lent money to the spendthrift young lords, but
with sound securities and at usurious interest. He had an army of slaves,
but these slaves were not ignorant field-hands; they were skilled workmen
in all arts and trades, whose labors he turned to profit in building
streets and palaces. Thus all that he touched turned to gold. He was the
wealthiest single individual in the whole Empire, the acknowledged head of
the business world of Rome.

The last person who need be noted was Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, the father
of the future colleague of Augustus and Antony. Lepidus, too, had been an
officer of Sylla's. He had been rewarded for his services by the
government of Sicily, and when Sylla died was the second consul with
Catulus. It was said against him that, like so many other governors, he
had enriched himself by tyrannizing over his Sicilian subjects. His
extortions had been notorious; he was threatened with prosecution as soon
as his consulship should expire; and the adventure to which he was about
to commit himself was undertaken, so the aristocrats afterward maintained,
in despair of an acquittal. Lepidus's side of the story was never told,
but another side it certainly had. Though one of Sylla's generals, he had
married the daughter of the tribune Saturninus. He had been elected consul
by a very large majority against the wishes of the Senate, and was
suspected of holding popular opinions. It may be that the prosecution was
an after-thought of revenge, and that Lepidus was to have been tried
before a senatorial jury already determined to find him guilty.

Among these men lay the fortunes of Rome when the departure of their chief
left the aristocrats masters of their own destiny.

During this time Caesar had been serving his apprenticeship as a soldier.
The motley forces which Mithridates had commanded had not all submitted on
the king's surrender to Sylla. Squadrons of pirates hung yet about the
smaller islands in the Aegean. Lesbos was occupied by adventurers who were
fighting for their own hand, and the praetor Minucius Thermus had been
sent to clear the seas and extirpate these nests of brigands. To Thermus
Caesar had attached himself. The praetor, finding that his fleet was not
strong enough for the work, found it necessary to apply to Nicomedes, the
allied sovereign of the adjoining kingdom of Bithynia, to supply him with
a few additional vessels; and Caesar, soon after his arrival, was
despatched on this commission to the Bithynian court.

Long afterward, when Roman cultivated society had come to hate Caesar, and
any scandal was welcome to them which would make him odious, it was
reported that on this occasion he entered into certain relations with
Nicomedes of a kind indisputably common at the time in the highest
patrician circles. The value of such a charge in political controversy was
considerable, for whether true or false it was certain to be believed; and
similar accusations were flung indiscriminately, so Cicero says, at the
reputation of every eminent person whom it was desirable to stain, if his
personal appearance gave the story any air of probability.[2]

The disposition to believe evil of men who have risen a few degrees above
their contemporaries is a feature of human nature as common as it is base;
and when to envy there are added fear and hatred, malicious anecdotes
spring like mushrooms in a forcing-pit. But gossip is not evidence, nor
does it become evidence because it is in Latin and has been repeated
through many generations. The strength of a chain is no greater than the
strength of its first link, and the adhesive character of calumny proves
only that the inclination of average men to believe the worst of great men
is the same in all ages. This particular accusation against Caesar gains,
perhaps, a certain credibility from the admission that it was the only
occasion on which anything of the kind could be alleged against him. On
the other hand, it was unheard of for near a quarter of a century. It was
produced in Rome in the midst of a furious political contest. No witnesses
were forthcoming; no one who had been at Bithynia at the time; no one who
ever pretended to have original knowledge of the truth of the story.
Caesar himself passed it by with disdain, or alluded to it, if forced upon
his notice, with contemptuous disgust.

The Bithynian mission was otherwise successful. He brought the ships to
Thermus. He distinguished himself personally in the storming of Mitylene,
and won the oak-wreath, the Victoria Cross of the Roman army. Still
pursuing the same career, Caesar next accompanied Servilius Isauricus in a
campaign against the horde of pirates, afterwards so famous, that was
forming itself among the creeks and river-mouths of Cilicia. The
advantages which Servilius obtained over them were considerable enough to
deserve a triumph, but were barren of result. The news that Sylla was dead
reached the army while still in the field; and the danger of appearing in
Rome being over, Caesar at once left Cilicia and went back to his family.
Other causes are said to have contributed to hasten his return. A plot had
been formed, with the consul Lepidus at its head, to undo Sylla's laws and
restore the constitution of the Gracchi. Caesar had been urged by letter
to take part in the movement, and he may have hurried home either to
examine the prospects of success or perhaps to prevent an attempt which,
under the circumstances, he might think criminal and useless. Lepidus was
not a wise man, though he may have been an honest one. The aristocracy had
not yet proved that they were incapable of reform. It might be that they
would digest their lesson after all, and that for a generation to come no
more revolutions would be necessary.

[Sidenote: B.C. 77. Caesar aet. 23.]
Caesar at all events declined to connect himself with this new adventure.
He came to Rome, looked at what was going on, and refused to have anything
to do with it. The experiment was tried without him. Young Cinna, his
brother-in-law, joined Lepidus. Together they raised a force in Etruria,
and marched on Rome. They made their way into the city, but were met in
the Campus Martius by Pompey and other consul, Catulus, at the head of
some of Sylla's old troops; and an abortive enterprise, which, if it had
succeeded, would probably have been mischievous, was ended almost as soon
as it began. The two leaders escaped. Cinna joined Sertorius in Spain.
Lepidus made his way to Sardinia, where in the next year he died, leaving
a son to play the game of democracy under more brilliant auspices.

[Sidenote: Caesar aet. 24.]
Caesar meanwhile felt his way, as Cicero was doing in the law-courts,
attacking the practical abuses which the Roman administration was
generating everywhere. Cornelius Dolabella had been placed by Sylla in
command of Macedonia. His father had been a friend of Saturninus, and had
fallen at his side. The son had gone over to the aristocracy, and for this
reason was perhaps an object of aversion to the younger liberals. The
Macedonians pursued him, when his government had expired, with a list of
grievances of the usual kind. Young Caesar took up their cause, and
prosecuted him. Dolabella was a favorite of the Senate; he had been
allowed a triumph for his services, and the aristocracy adopted his cause
as their own. The unpractised orator was opposed at the trial by his
kinsman Aurelius Cotta and the most celebrated pleaders in Rome. To have
crossed swords with such opponents was a dangerous honor for him; success
against them was not to be expected, and Caesar was not yet master of his
art. Dolabella was acquitted. Party feeling had perhaps entered into the
accusation. Caesar found it prudent to retire again from the scene. There
were but two roads to eminence in Rome--oratory and service in the army.
He had no prospect of public employment from the present administration,
and the platform alone was open to him. Plain words with a plain meaning
in them no longer carried weight with a people who expected an orator to
delight as well as instruct them. The use of the tongue had become a
special branch of a statesman's education, and Caesar, feeling his
deficiency, used his leisure to put himself in training and to go to
school at Rhodes with the then celebrated Apollonius Molo. He had
recovered his property and his priesthood, and was evidently in no want of
money. He travelled with the retinue of a man of rank, and on his way to
Rhodes he fell in with an adventure which may be something more than
legend. When he was crossing the Aegean his vessel is said to have been
taken by pirates. They carried him to Pharmacusa,[3] an island off the
Carian coast, which was then in their possession, and there he was
detained for six weeks with three of his attendants, while the rest of his
servants were sent to the nearest Roman station to raise his ransom. The
pirates treated him with politeness. He joined in their sports, played
games with them, looked into their habits, and amused himself with them as
well as he could, frankly telling them at the same time that they would
all be hanged.

The ransom, a very large one, about L10,000, was brought and paid. Caesar
was set upon the mainland near Miletus, where, without a moment's delay,
he collected some armed vessels, returned to the island, seized the whole
crew while they were dividing their plunder, and took them away to
Pergamus, the seat of government in the Asiatic province, where they were
convicted and crucified. Clemency was not a Roman characteristic. It was
therefore noted with some surprise that Caesar interceded to mitigate the
severity of the punishment. The poor wretches were strangled before they
were stretched on their crosses, and were spared the prolongation of their
torture. The pirate business being disposed of, he resumed his journey to
Rhodes, and there he continued for two years practising gesture and
expression under the tuition of the great master.

[Sidenote: B.C. 78-72]
During this time the government of Rome was making progress in again
demonstrating its unfitness for the duties which were laid upon it, and
sowing the seeds which in a few years were to ripen into a harvest so
remarkable. Two alternatives only lay before the Roman dominion--either
disruption or the abolition of the constitution. If the aristocracy could
not govern, still less could the mob govern. The Latin race was scattered
over the basin of the Mediterranean, no longer bound by any special ties
to Rome or Italy, each man of it individually vigorous and  energetic, and
bent before all things on making his own fortune. If no tolerable
administration was provided from home, their obvious course could only be
to identify themselves with local interests and nationalities and make
themselves severally independent, as Sertorius was doing in Spain.
Sertorius was at last disposed of, but by methods promising ill for the
future. He beat Metellus till Metellus could do no more against him. The
all-victorious Pompey was sent at last to win victories and gain nothing
by them. Six campaigns led to no result and the difficulty was only
removed at last by treachery and assassination.

A more extraordinary and more disgraceful phenomenon was the growth of
piracy, with the skirts of which Caesar had come in contact at Pharmacusa.
The Romans had become masters of the world, only that the sea from one end
of their dominions to the other should be patrolled by organized rovers.
For many years, as Roman commerce extended, the Mediterranean had become a
profitable field of enterprise for those gentry. From every country which
they had overrun or occupied the conquests of the Romans had let loose
swarms of restless patriots who, if they could not save the liberties of
their own countries, could prey upon the oppressor. Illyrians from the
Adriatic, Greeks from the islands and the Asiatic ports, Syrians,
Egyptians, Africans, Spaniards, Gauls, and disaffected Italians, trained
many of them to the sea from their childhood, took to the water in their
light galleys with all the world before them. Under most circumstances
society is protected against thieves by their inability to combine. But
the pirates of the Mediterranean had learnt from the Romans the advantage
of union, and had drifted into a vast confederation. Cilicia was their
head-quarters. Servilius had checked them for a time, but the Roman Senate
was too eager for a revenue, and the Roman governors and farmers of the
taxes were too bent upon filling their private purses, to allow fleets to
be maintained in the provincial harbors adequate to keep the peace. When
Servilius retired, the pirates reoccupied their old haunts. The Cilician
forests furnished them with ship timber. The mountain gorges provided
inaccessible storehouses for plunder. Crete was completely in their hands
also, and they had secret friends along the entire Mediterranean shores.
They grew at last into a thousand sail, divided into squadrons under
separate commanders. They were admirably armed. They roved over the waters
at their pleasure, attacking islands or commercial ports, plundering
temples and warehouses, arresting every trading vessel they encountered,
till at last no Roman could go abroad on business save during the winter
storms, when the sea was comparatively clear. They flaunted their sails in
front of Ostia itself; they landed in their boats at the villas on the
Italian coast, carrying off lords and ladies, and holding them to ransom.
They levied black-mail at their pleasure. The wretched provincials had
paid their taxes to Rome in exchange for promised defence, and no defence
was provided.[4] The revenue which ought to have been spent on the
protection of the Empire a few patricians were dividing among themselves.
The pirates had even marts in different islands, where their prisoners
were sold to the slave-dealers; and for fifteen years nothing was done or
even attempted to put an end to so preposterous an enormity. The ease with
which these buccaneers of the old world were eventually suppressed proved
conclusively that they existed by connivance. It was discovered at last
that large sums had been sent regularly from Crete to some of the most
distinguished members of the aristocracy. The Senate was again the same
body which it was found by Jugurtha, and the present generation were
happier than their fathers in that larger and richer fields were now open
to their operation.

While the pirates were at work on the extremities, the senators in the
provinces were working systematically, squeezing the people as one might
squeeze a sponge of all the wealth that could be drained out of them.
After the failure of Lepidus the elections in Rome were wholely in the
Senate's hands. Such independence as had not been crushed was corrupted.
The aristocracy divided the consulships, praetorships, and quaestorships
among themselves, and after the year of office the provincial prizes were
then distributed. Of the nature of their government a picture has been
left by Cicero, himself one of the senatorial party, and certainly not to
be suspected of having represented it as worse than it was in the famous
prosecution of Verres. There is nothing to show that Verres was worse than
the rest of his order. Piso, Gabinius, and many others equalled or perhaps
excelled him in villainy. But historical fate required a victim, and the
unfortunate wretch has been selected out of the crowd individually to
illustrate his class.

By family he was connected with Sylla. His father was noted as an election
manager at the Comitia. The son had been attached to Carbo when the
democrats were in power, but he had deserted them on Sylla's return. He
had made himself useful in the proscriptions, and had scraped together a
considerable fortune. He was employed afterward in Greece and Asia, where
he distinguished himself by fresh rapacity and by the gross brutality with
which he abused an innocent lady. With the wealth which he had extorted or
stolen he bought his way into the praetorship, probably with his father's
help; he then became a senator, and was sent to govern Sicily--a place
which had already suffered, so the Senate said, from the malpractices of
Lepidus, and needing, therefore, to be generously dealt with.

Verres held his province for three years. He was supreme judge in all
civil and criminal cases. He negotiated with the parties to every suit
which was brought before him, and then sold his decisions. He confiscated
estates on fictitious accusations. The island was rich in works of art.
Verres had a taste for such things, and seized without scruple the finest
productions of Praxiteles or Zeuxis. If those who were wronged dared to
complain, they were sent to forced labor at the quarries, or, as dead men
tell no tales, were put out of the world. He had an understanding with the
pirates, which throws light upon the secret of their impunity. A shipful
of them were brought into Messina as prisoners, and were sentenced to be
executed. A handsome bribe was paid to Verres, and a number of Sicilians
whom he wished out of the way were brought out, veiled and gagged that
they might not be recognized, and were hanged as the pirates' substitutes.
By these methods Verres was accused of having gathered out of Sicily three
quarters of a million of our money. Two thirds he calculated on having to
spend in corrupting the consuls and the court before which he might be
prosecuted. The rest he would be able to save, and with the help of it to
follow his career of greatness through the highest offices of state. Thus
he had gone on upon his way, secure, as he supposed, of impunity. One of
the consuls for the year and the consuls for the year which was to come
next were pledged to support him. The judges would be exclusively
senators, each of whom might require assistance in a similar situation.
The chance of justice on these occasions was so desperate that the
provincials preferred usually to bear their wrongs in silence rather than
expose themselves to expense and danger for almost certain failure. But,
as Cicero said, the whole world inside the ocean was ringing with the
infamy of the Roman senatorial tribunals.

Cicero, whose honest wish was to save the Senate from itself, determined
to make use of Verres's conduct to shame the courts into honesty. Every
difficulty was thrown in his way. He went in person to Sicily to procure
evidence. He was browbeaten and threatened with violence. The witnesses
were intimidated, and in some instances were murdered. The technical
ingenuities of Roman law were exhausted to shield the culprit. The
accident that the second consul had a conscience alone enabled Cicero to
force the criminal to the bar. But the picture which Cicero drew and laid
before the people, proved as it was to every detail, and admitting of no
answer save that other governors had been equally iniquitous and had
escaped unpunished, created a storm which the Senate dared not encounter.
Verres dropped his defence and fled, and part of his spoils was recovered.
There was no shame in the aristocracy to prevent them from committing
crimes: there was enough to make them abandon a comrade who was so
unfortunate as to be detected and brought to justice.

This was the state of the Roman dominion under the constitution as
reformed by Sylla: the Spanish Peninsula recovered by murder to temporary
submission; the sea abandoned to buccaneers; decent industrious people in
the provinces given over to have their fortunes stolen from them, their
daughters dishonored, and themselves beaten or killed if they complained,
by a set of wolves calling themselves Roman senators--and these scenes not
localized to any one unhappy district, but extending through the entire
civilized part of mankind. There was no hope for these unhappy people, for
they were under the tyranny of a dead hand. A bad king is like a bad
season. The next may bring improvement, or if his rule is wholly
intolerable he can be deposed. Under a bad constitution no such change is
possible. It can be ended only by a revolution. Republican Rome had become
an Imperial State--she had taken upon herself the guardianship of every
country in the world where the human race was industrious and prosperous,
and she was discharging her great trust by sacrificing them to the luxury
and ambition of a few hundred scandalous politicians.

[Sidenote: B.C. 74.]
The nature of man is so constructed that a constitution so administered
must collapse. It generates faction within, it invites enemies from
without. While Sertorius was defying the Senate in Spain and the pirates
were buying its connivance in the Mediterranean, Mithridates started into
life again in Pontus. Sylla had beaten him into submission; but Sylla was
gone, and no one was left to take Sylla's place. The watchful barbarian
had his correspondents in Rome, and knew everything that was passing
there. He saw that he had little to fear by trying the issue with the
Romans once more. He made himself master of Armenia. In the corsair fleet
he had an ally ready made. The Roman province in Asia Minor, driven to
despair by the villainy of its governors, was ripe for revolt. Mithridates
rose, and but for the young Caesar would a second time have driven the
Romans out of Asia. Caesar, in the midst of his rhetorical studies at
Rhodes, heard the mutterings of the coming storm. Deserting Apollonius's
lecture-room, he crossed over to the continent, raised a corps of
volunteers, and held Caria to its allegiance; but Mithridates possessed
himself easily of the interior kingdoms and of the whole valley of the
Euphrates to the Persian Gulf. The Black Sea was again covered with his
ships. He defeated Cotta in a naval battle, drove him through the
Bosphorus, and destroyed the Roman squadron. The Senate exerted itself at
last. Lucullus, Sylla's friend, the only moderately able man that the
aristocracy had among them, was sent to encounter him. Lucullus had been
trained in a good school, and the superiority of the drilled Roman legions
when tolerably led again easily asserted itself. Mithridates was forced
back into the Armenian hills. The Black Sea was swept clear, and eight
thousand of the buccaneers were killed at Sinope. Lucullus pursued the
retreating prince across the Euphrates, won victories, took cities and
pillaged them. He reached Lake Van, he marched round Mount Ararat and
advanced to Artaxata. But Asia was a scene of dangerous temptation for a
Roman commander. Cicero, though he did not name Lucullus, was
transparently alluding to him when he told the assembly in the Forum that
Rome had made herself abhorred throughout the world by the violence and
avarice of her generals. No temple had been so sacred, no city so
venerable, no houses so well protected, as to be secure from their
voracity. Occasions of war had been caught at with rich communities where
plunder was the only object. The proconsuls could win battles, but they
could not keep their hands from off the treasures of their allies and
subjects.[5]

Lucullus was splendid in his rapacity, and amidst his victories he had
amassed the largest fortune which had yet belonged to patrician or
commoner, except Crassus. Nothing came amiss to him. He had sold the
commissions in his army. He had taken money out of the treasury for the
expenses of the campaign. Part he had spent in bribing the administration
to prolong his command beyond the usual time; the rest he had left in the
city to accumulate for himself at interest.[6] He lived on the plunder
of friend and foe, and the defeat of Mithridates was never more than a
second object to him. The one steady purpose in which he never varied was
to pile up gold and jewels.

An army so organized and so employed soon loses efficiency and coherence.
The legions, perhaps considering that they were not allowed a fair share
of the spoil, mutinied. The disaffection was headed by young Publius
Clodius, whose sister Lucullus had married. The campaign which had opened
brilliantly ended ignominiously. The Romans had to fall back behind
Pontus, closely pursued by Mithridates. Lucullus stood on the defensive
till he was recalled, and he then returned to Rome to lounge away the
remainder of his days in voluptuous magnificence.

While Lucullus was making his fortune in the East, a spurt of
insurrectionary fire had broken out in Italy. The agrarian laws and
Sylla's proscriptions and confiscations had restored the numbers of the
small proprietors, but the statesmen who had been so eager for their
reinstatement were fighting against tendencies too strong for them. Life
on the farm, like life in the city, was growing yearly more extravagant.
[7] The small peasants fell into debt. Sylla's soldiers were expensive,
and became embarrassed. Thus the small properties artificially
re-established were falling rapidly again into the market. The great
landowners bought them up, and Italy was once more lapsing to territorial
magnates cultivating their estates by slaves.

Vast gangs of slave laborers were thus still dispersed over the peninsula,
while others in large numbers were purchased and trained for the amusement
of the metropolis. Society in Rome, enervated as it was by vicious
pleasures, craved continually for new excitements. Sensuality is a near
relation of cruelty; and the more savage the entertainments, the more
delightful they were to the curled and scented patricians who had lost the
taste for finer enjoyments. Combats of wild beasts were at first
sufficient for them, but to see men kill each other gave a keener delight;
and out of the thousands of youths who were sent over annually by the
provincial governors, or were purchased from the pirates by the
slave-dealers, the most promising were selected for the arena. Each great
noble had his training establishment of gladiators, and was as vain of
their prowess as of his race-horses. The schools of Capua were the most
celebrated; and nothing so recommended a candidate for the consulship to
the electors as the production of a few pairs of Capuan swords-men in the
circus.

[Sidenote: B.C. 72-70.]
These young men had hitherto performed their duties with more
submissiveness than might have been expected, and had slaughtered one
another in the most approved methods. But the horse knows by the hand on
his rein whether he has a fool for his rider. The gladiators in the
schools and the slaves on the plantations could not be kept wholly
ignorant of the character of their rulers. They were aware that the seas
were held by their friends the pirates, and that their masters were again
being beaten out of Asia, from which many of themselves had been carried
off. They began to ask themselves why men who could use their swords
should be slaves when their comrades and kindred were up and fighting for
freedom. They found a leader in a young Thracian robber chief, named
Spartacus, who was destined for the amphitheatre, and who preferred
meeting his masters in the field to killing his friends to make a Roman
holiday. Spartacus, with two hundred of his companions, burst out from the
Capuan "stable," seized their arms, and made their way into the crater of
Vesuvius, which was then, after the long sleep of the volcano, a dense
jungle of wild vines. The slaves from the adjoining plantations deserted
and joined them. The fire spread, Spartacus proclaimed universal
emancipation, and in a few weeks was at the head of an army with which he
overran Italy to the foot of the Alps, defeated consuls and praetors,
captured the eagles of the legions, wasted the farms of the noble lords,
and for two years held his ground against all that Rome could do.

Of all the illustrations of the Senate's incapacity, the slave
insurrection was perhaps the worst. It was put down at last after
desperate exertions by Crassus and Pompey. Spartacus was killed, and six
thousand of his followers were impaled at various points on the sides of
the high-roads, that the slaves might have before their eyes examples of
the effect of disobedience. The immediate peril was over; but another
symptom had appeared of the social disease which would soon end in death
unless some remedy could be found. The nation was still strong. There was
power and worth in the undegenerate Italian race, which needed only to be
organized and ruled. But what remedy was possible? The practical choice of
politicians lay between the Senate and the democracy. Both were alike
bloody and unscrupulous; and the rule of the Senate meant corruption and
imbecility, and the rule of the democracy meant anarchy.

[1] "Unum hoc dico: nostri isti nobiles, nisi vigilantes et boni et fortes
    et misericordes erunt, iis hominibus in quibus haec erunt, ornamenta
    sua concedant necesse est."--_Pro Roscio Amerino_, sec. 48.

[2] "Sunt enim ista maledicta pervulgata in omnes, quorum in adolescentia
    forma et species fuit liberalis."--_Oratio pro Marca Caelio_.

[3] Now Fermaco.

[4] "Videbat enim populum Romanum non locupletari quotannis pecunia
    publica praeter paucos: neque eos quidquam aliud assequi classium
    nomine, nisi ut, detrimentis accipiendis majore affici turpitudine
    videremur."--Cicero, _Pro Lege Manilia_, 23.

[5] "Difficile est dictu, Quirites, quanto in odio simus apud exteras
    nationes, propter eorum, quos ad eas per hos annos cum imperio
    misimus, injurias ac libidines. Quod enim fanum putatis in illis
    terris nostris magistratibus religiosum, quam civitatem sanctam, quam
    domum satis clausam ac munitam fuisse? Urbes jam locupletes ac
    copiosae requiruntur, quibus causa belli propter diripiendi
    cupiditatem inferatur.... Quare etiamsi quem habetis, qui collatis
    signis exercitus regios superare posse videatur, tamen, nisi erit
    idem, qui se a pecuniis sociorum, qui ab eorum conjugibus ac liberis,
    qui ab ornamentis fanorum atque oppidorum, qui ab auro gazaque regia
    manus, oculos, animum cohibere possit, non erit idoneus, qui ad
    bellum Asiaticum regiumque mittatur."--_Pro Lege Manilia_, 22,
    23.

[6] "Quem possumus imperatorem aliquo in numero putare, cujus in exercitu
    veneant centuriatus atque venierint? Quid hunc hominem magnum aut
    amplum de republica cogitare, qui pecuniam ex aerario depromtam ad
    bellum administrandum, aut propter cupiditatem provinciae
    magistratibus diviserit aut propter avaritiam Romae in quaestu
    reliquerit? Vestra admurmuratio facit, Quirites, ut agnoscere
    videamini qui haec fecerint: ego autem neminem nomino."--_Pro Lege
    Manilia_, 13.

[7] Varro mentions curious instances of the change in country manners. He
    makes an old man say that when he was a boy, a farmer's wife used to
    be content with a jaunt in a cart once or twice a year, the farmer not
    taking out the covered wagon (the more luxurious vehicle) at all
    unless he pleased. The farmer used to shave only once a week,
    etc.--_M. Ter. Varronis Reliquiae_, ed. Alexander Riese, pp. 139,
    140.




CHAPTER X.


Caesar, having done his small piece of independent service in Caria, and
having finished his course with Apollonius, now came again to Rome and
re-entered practical life. He lived with his wife and his mother Aurelia
in a modest house, attracting no particular notice. But his defiance of
Sylla, his prosecution of Dolabella, and his known political sympathies
made him early a favorite with the people. The growing disorders at home
and abroad, with the exposures on the trial of Verres, were weakening
daily the influence of the Senate. Caesar was elected military tribune as
a reward for his services in Asia, and he assisted in recovering part of
the privileges so dear to the citizens which Sylla had taken from the
tribunes of the people. They were again enabled to call the assembly
together, and though they were still unable to propose laws without the
Senate's sanction, yet they regained the privilege of consulting directly
with the nation on public affairs. Caesar now spoke well enough to command
the admiration of even Cicero--without ornament, but directly to the
purpose. Among the first uses to which he addressed his influence was to
obtain the pardon of his brother-in-law, the younger Cinna, who had been
exiled since the failure of the attempt of Lepidus. In B.C. 68, being then
thirty-two, he gained his first step on the ladder of high office. He was
made quaestor, which gave him a place in the Senate.

Soon after his election, his aunt Julia, the widow of Marius, died. It was
usual on the death of eminent persons for a near relation to make an
oration at the funeral. Caesar spoke on this occasion. It was observed
that he dwelt with some pride on the lady's ancestry, descending on one
side from the gods, on another from the kings of Rome. More noticeably he
introduced into the burial procession the insignia and images of Marius
himself, whose name for some years it had been unsafe to mention.[1]

Pompey, after Sertorius's death, had pacified Spain. He had assisted
Crassus in extinguishing Spartacus. The Senate had employed him, but had
never liked him or trusted him. The Senate, however, was no longer
omnipotent, and in the year 70 he and Crassus had been consuls. Pompey was
no politician, but he was honorable and straightforward. Like every true
Roman, he was awake to the dangers and disgrace of the existing
mal-administration, and he and Caesar began to know each other, and to
find their interest in working together. Pompey was the elder of the two
by six years. He was already a great man, covered with distinctions, and
perhaps he supposed that he was finding in Caesar a useful subordinate.
Caesar naturally liked Pompey, as a really distinguished soldier and an
upright disinterested man. They became connected by marriage. Cornelia
dying, Caesar took for his second wife Pompey's cousin, Pompeia; and, no
doubt at Pompey's instance, he was sent into Spain to complete Pompey's
work and settle the finances of that distracted country. His reputation as
belonging to the party of Marius and Sertorius secured him the confidence
of Sertorius's friends. He accomplished his mission completely and easily.
On his way back he passed through northern Italy, and took occasion to say
there that he considered the time to have come for the franchise, which
now stopped at the Po, to be extended to the foot of the Alps.

The consulship of Pompey and Crassus had brought many changes with it, all
tending in the same direction. The tribunes were restored to their old
functions, the censorship was re-established, and the Senate was at once
weeded of many of its disreputable members. Cicero, conservative as he
was, had looked upon these measures if not approvingly yet without active
opposition. To another change he had himself contributed by his speeches
on the Verres prosecution. The exclusive judicial powers which the Senate
had abused so scandalously were again taken from them. The courts of the
equites were remembered in contrast, and a law was passed that for the
future the courts were to be composed two thirds of knights and one third
only of senators. Cicero's hope of resisting democracy lay in the fusion
of the great commoners with the Senate. It was no longer possible for the
aristocracy to rule alone. The few equites who, since Sylla's time, had
made their way into the Senate had yielded to patrician ascendency. Cicero
aimed at a reunion of the orders; and the consulship of Crassus, little as
Cicero liked Crassus personally, was a sign of a growing tendency in this
direction. At all costs the knights must be prevented from identifying
themselves with the democrats, and therefore all possible compliments and
all possible concessions to their interests were made to them.

They recovered their position in the law-courts; and, which was of more
importance to them, the system of farming the taxes, in which so many of
them had made their fortunes, and which Sylla had abolished, was once
again reverted to. It was not a good system, but it was better than a
state of things in which little of the revenue had reached the public
treasury at all, but had been intercepted and parcelled out among the
oligarchy.

[Sidenote: B.C. 67.]
With recovered vitality a keener apprehension began to be felt of the
pirate scandal. The buccaneers, encouraged by the Senate's connivance,
were more daring than ever. They had become a sea community, led by
high-born adventurers, who maintained out of their plunder a show of wild
magnificence. The oars of the galleys of their commanders were plated with
silver; their cabins were hung with gorgeous tapestry. They had bands of
music to play at their triumphs. They had a religion of their own, an
oriental medley called the Mysteries of Mithras. They had captured and
pillaged four hundred considerable towns, and had spoiled the temples of
the Grecian gods. They had maintained and extended their depots where they
disposed of their prisoners to the slave-dealers. Roman citizens who could
not ransom themselves, and could not conveniently be sold, were informed
that they might go where they pleased; they were led to a plank projecting
over some vessel's side, and were bidden depart--into the sea. Not
contented with insulting Ostia by their presence outside, they had
ventured into the harbor itself, and had burnt the ships there. They held
complete possession of the Italian waters. Rome, depending on Sicily and
Sardinia and Africa for her supplies of corn, was starving for want of
food, and the foreign trade on which so many of the middle classes were
engaged was totally destroyed. The return of the commoners to power was a
signal for an active movement to put an end to the disgrace. No one
questioned that it could be done if there was a will to do it. But the
work could be accomplished only by persons who would be proof against
corruption. There was but one man in high position who could be trusted,
and that was Pompey. The general to be selected must have unrestricted and
therefore unconstitutional authority. But Pompey was at once capable and
honest. Pompey could not be bribed by the pirates, and Pompey could be
depended on not to abuse his opportunities to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth.

[Sidenote: B.C. 67.]
The natural course, therefore, would have been to declare Pompey dictator;
but Sylla had made the name unpopular; the right to appoint a dictator lay
with the Senate, with whom Pompey had never been a favorite, and the
aristocracy had disliked and feared him more than ever since his
consulship. From that quarter no help was to be looked for, and a method
was devised to give him the reality of power without the title. Unity of
command was the one essential--command untrammelled by orders from
committees of weak and treacherous noblemen, who cared only for the
interest of their class. The established forms were scrupulously observed,
and the plan designed was brought forward first, according to rule, in the
Senate. A tribune, Aulus Gabinius, introduced a proposition there that one
person of consular rank should have absolute jurisdiction during three
years over the whole Mediterranean, and over all Roman territory for fifty
miles inland from the coast; that the money in the treasury should be
at his disposition; that he should have power to raise 500 ships of war
and to collect and organize 130,000 men. No such command for such a time
had ever been committed to any one man since the abolition of the
monarchy. It was equivalent to a suspension of the Senate itself, and of
all constitutional government. The proposal was received with a burst of
fury. Every one knew that the person intended was Pompey. The decorum of
the old days was forgotten. The noble lords started from their seats, flew
at Gabinius, and almost strangled him: but he had friends outside the
house ready to defend their champion; the country people had flocked in
for the occasion; the city was thronged with multitudes such as had not
been seen there since the days of the Gracchi. The tribune freed himself
from the hands that were at his throat; he rushed out into the Forum,
closely pursued by the consul Piso, who would have been torn in pieces in
turn had not Gabinius interposed to save him. Senate or no Senate, it was
decided that Gabinius's proposition should be submitted to the assembly,
and the aristocrats were driven to their old remedy of bribing other
members of the college of tribunes to interfere. Two renegades were thus
secured, and when the voting-day came, Trebellius, who was one of them,
put in a veto; the other, Roscius, said that the power intended for Pompey
was too considerable to be trusted to a single person, and proposed two
commanders instead of one. The mob was packed so thick that the house-tops
were covered. A yell rose from tens of thousands of throats so piercing
that it was said a crow flying over the Forum dropped dead at the sound of
it. The old patrician Catulus tried to speak, but the people would not
hear him. The vote passed by acclamation, and Pompey was for three years
sovereign of the Roman world.

It now appeared how strong the Romans were when a fair chance was allowed
them. Pompey had no extraordinary talents, but not in three years, but in
three months, the pirates were extinguished. He divided the Mediterranean
into thirteen districts, and allotted a squadron to each, under officers
on whom he could thoroughly rely. Ships and seamen were found in abundance
lying idle from the suspension of trade. In forty days he had cleared the
seas between Gibraltar and Italy. He had captured entire corsair fleets,
and had sent the rest flying into the Cilician creeks. There, in defence
of their plunder and their families, they fought one desperate engagement,
and when defeated, they surrendered without a further blow. Of real
strength they had possessed none from the first. They had subsisted only
through the guilty complicity of the Roman authorities, and they fell at
the first stroke which was aimed at them in earnest. Thirteen hundred
pirate ships were burnt. Their docks and arsenals were destroyed, and
their fortresses were razed. Twenty-two thousand prisoners fell into the
hands of Pompey. To the astonishment of mankind, Pompey neither impaled
them, as the Senate had impaled the followers of Spartacus, nor even sold
them for slaves. He was contented to scatter them among inland colonies,
where they could no longer be dangerous.

The suppression of the buccaneers was really a brilliant piece of work,
and the ease with which it was accomplished brought fresh disgrace on the
Senate and fresh glory on the hero of the hour. Cicero, with his thoughts
fixed on saving the constitution, considered that Pompey might be the man
to save it; or, at all events, that it would be unsafe to leave him to the
democrats who had given him power and were triumphing in his success. On
political grounds Cicero thought that Pompey ought to be recognized by the
moderate party which he intended to form; and a person like himself who
hoped to rise by the popular votes could not otherwise afford to seem cold
amidst the universal enthusiasm. The pirates were abolished. Mithridates
was still undisposed of. Lucullus, the hope of the aristocracy, was lying
helpless within the Roman frontier, with a disorganized and mutinous army.
His victories were forgotten. He was regarded as the impersonation of
every fault which had made the rule of the Senate so hateful. Pompey, the
people's general, after a splendid success, had come home with clean
hands; Lucullus had sacrificed his country to his avarice. The contrast
set off his failures in colors perhaps darker than really belonged to
them, and the cry naturally rose that Lucullus must be called back, and
the all-victorious Pompey must be sent for the reconquest of Asia. Another
tribune, Manilius, brought the question forward, this time directly before
the assembly, the Senate's consent not being any more asked for. Caesar
again brought his influence to bear on Pompey's side; but Caesar found
support in a quarter where it might not have been looked for. The Senate
was furious as before, but by far the most gifted person in the
conservative party now openly turned against them. Cicero was praetor this
year, and was thus himself a senator. A seat in the Senate had been the
supreme object of his ambition. He was vain of the honor which he had won,
and delighted with the high company into which he had been received; but
he was too shrewd to go along with them upon a road which could lead only
to their overthrow; and for their own sake, and for the sake of the
institution itself of which he meant to be an illustrious ornament, he not
only supported the Manilian proposition, but supported it in a speech more
effective than the wildest outpourings of democratic rhetoric.

Asia Minor, he said, was of all the Roman provinces the most important,
because it was the most wealthy.[2] So rich it was and fertile that, for
the productiveness of its soil, the variety of its fruits, the extent of
its pastures, and the multitude of its exports, there was no country in
the world to be compared with it; yet Asia was in danger of being utterly
lost through the worthlessnesss of the governors and military commanders
charged with the care of it. "Who does not know," Cicero asked, "that the
avarice of our generals has been the cause of the misfortunes of our
armies? You can see for yourselves how they act here at home in Italy; and
what will they not venture far away in distant countries? Officers who
cannot restrain their own appetites can never maintain discipline in their
troops. Pompey has been victorious because he does not loiter about the
towns for plunder or pleasure, or making collections of statues and
pictures. Asia is a land of temptations. Send no one thither who cannot
resist gold and jewels and shrines and pretty women. Pompey is upright and
pure-sighted. Pompey knows that the State has been impoverished because
the revenue flows into the coffers of a few individuals. Our fleets and
armies have availed only to bring the more disgrace upon us through our
defeats and losses." [3]

After passing a deserved panegyric on the suppression of the pirates,
Cicero urged with all the power of his oratory that Manilius's measures
should be adopted, and that the same general who had done so well already
should be sent against Mithridates.

This was perhaps the only occasion on which Cicero ever addressed the
assembly in favor of the proposals of a popular tribune. Well would it
have been for him and well for Rome if he could have held on upon a course
into which he had been led by real patriotism. He was now in his proper
place, where his better mind must have told him that he ought to have
continued, working by the side of Caesar and Pompey. It was observed that
more than once in his speech he mentioned with high honor the name of
Marius. He appeared to have seen clearly that the Senate was bringing the
State to perdition; and that unless the Republic was to end in
dissolution, or in mob rule and despotism, the wise course was to
recognize the legitimate tendencies of popular sentiment, and to lend the
constant weight of his authority to those who were acting in harmony with
it. But Cicero could never wholly forget his own consequence, or bring
himself to persist in any policy where he could play but a secondary part.

[Sidenote: B.C. 66-63.]
The Manilian law was carried. In addition to his present extraordinary
command, Pompey was entrusted with the conduct of the war in Asia, and he
was left unfettered to act at his own discretion. He crossed the Bosphorus
with fifty thousand men; he invaded Pontus; he inflicted a decisive defeat
on Mithridates, and broke up his army; he drove the Armenians back into
their own mountains, and extorted out of them a heavy war indemnity. The
barbarian king who had so long defied the Roman power was beaten down at
last, and fled across the Black Sea to Kertch, where his sons turned
against him. He was sixty-eight years old, and could not wait till the
wheel should make another turn. Broken down at last, he took leave of a
world in which for him there was no longer a place. His women poisoned
themselves successfully. He, too fortified by antidotes to end as they
ended, sought a surer death, and fell like Saul by the sword of a slave.
Rome had put out her real strength, and at once, as before, all opposition
went down before her. Asia was completely conquered up to the line of the
Euphrates. The Black Sea was held securely by a Roman fleet. Pompey passed
down into Syria. Antioch surrendered without resistance. Tyre and Damascus
followed. Jerusalem was taken by storm, and the Roman general entered the
Holy of Holies. Of all the countries bordering on the Mediterranean Egypt
only was left independent, and of all the islands only Cyprus. A triumphal
inscription in Rome declared that Pompey, the people's general, had in
three years captured fifteen hundred cities, and had slain, taken, or
reduced to submission twelve million human beings. He justified what
Cicero had foretold of his moral uprightness. In the midst of
opportunities such as had fallen to no commander since Alexander, he
outraged no woman's honor, and he kept his hands clean from "the accursed
thing." When he returned to Rome, he returned, as he went, personally
poor, but he filled the treasury to overflowing. His campaign was not a
marauding raid, like the march of Lucullus on Artaxata. His conquests were
permanent. The East, which was then thickly inhabited by an industrious
civilized Graeco-Oriental race, became incorporated in the Roman dominion,
and the annual revenue of the State rose to twice what it had been.
Pompey's success had been dazzlingly rapid. Envy and hatred, as he well
knew, were waiting for him at home, and he was in no haste to present
himself there. He lingered in Asia, organizing the administration and
consolidating his work, while at Rome the constitution was rushing on upon
its old courses among the broken waters, with the roar of the not distant
cataract growing every moment louder.

[1] The name of Marius, it is to be observed, remained so popular in Rome
    that Cicero after this always spoke of him with respect.

[2] "Asia vero tam opima est et fertilis, ut et ubertate agrorum et
    varietate fructuum et magnitudine pastionis, et multitudine earum
    rerum, quae exportentur, facile omnibus terris antecellat."--_Pro
    Lege Manilia_. Cicero's expressions are worth notice at a time when
    Asia Minor has become of importance to England.

[3] _Pro Lege Manilia_. abridged.




CHAPTER XI.


[Sidenote: B.C. 64.]
Among the patricians who were rising through the lower magistracies and
were aspiring to the consulship was Lucius Sergius Catiline. Catiline, now
in middle life, had when young been a fervent admirer of Sylla, and, as
has been already said, had been an active agent in the proscription. He
had murdered his brother-in-law, and perhaps his brother, under political
pretences. In an age when licentiousness of the grossest kind was too
common to attract attention, Catiline had achieved a notoriety for infamy.
Ho had intrigued with a Vestal virgin, the sister of Cicero's wife,
Terentia. If Cicero is to be believed, he had made away with his own wife,
that he might marry Aurelia Orestilla, a woman as wicked as she was
beautiful, and he had killed his child also because Aurelia had objected
to be encumbered with a step-son. But this, too, was common in high
society in those days. Adultery and incest had become familiar
excitements. Boys of ten years old had learnt the art of poisoning their
fathers,[1] and the story of Aurelia Orestilla and Catiline had been
rehearsed a few years before by Sassia and Oppianicus at Larino.[2]
Other enormities Catiline had been guilty of which Cicero declined to
mention, lest he should show too openly what crimes might go unpunished
under the senatorial administration. But villainy, however notorious, did
not interfere with advancement in the public service. Catiline was adroit,
bold, and even captivating. He made his way into high office along the
usual gradations. He was praetor in B.C. 68. He went as governor to Africa
in the year following, and he returned with money enough, as he reasonably
hoped, to purchase the last step to the consulship. He was impeached when
he came back for extortion and oppression, under one of the many laws
which were made to be laughed at. Till his trial was over he was
disqualified from presenting himself as a candidate, and the election for
the year 65 was carried by Autronius Paetus and Cornelius Sylla. Two other
patricians, Aurelius Cotta and Manlius Torquatus, had stood against them.
The successful competitors were unseated for bribery; Cotta and Torquatus
took their places, and, apparently as a natural resource in the existing
contempt into which the constitution had fallen, the disappointed
candidates formed a plot to kill their rivals and their rivals' friends in
the Senate, and to make a revolution. Cneius Piso, a young nobleman of the
bluest blood, joined in the conspiracy. Catiline threw himself into it as
his natural element, and aristocratic tradition said in later years that
Caesar and Crassus were implicated also. Some desperate scheme there
certainly was, but the accounts of it are confused: one authority says
that it failed because Catiline gave the signal prematurely; others that
Caesar was to have given the signal, and did not do it; others that
Crassus's heart failed him; others that the consuls had secret notice
given to them and took precautions. Cicero, who was in Rome at the time,
declares that he never heard of the conspiracy.[3] When evidence is
inconclusive, probability becomes argument. Nothing can be less likely
than that a cautious capitalist of vast wealth like Crassus should have
connected himself with a party of dissolute adventurers. Had Caesar
committed himself, jealously watched as he was by the aristocrats, some
proofs of his complicity would have been forthcoming. The aristocracy
under the empire revenged themselves for their ruin by charging Caesar
with a share in every combination that had been formed against them, from
Sylla's time downwards. Be the truth what it may, nothing came of this
project. Piso went to Spain, where he was killed. The prosecution of
Catiline for his African misgovernment was continued, and, strange to say,
Cicero undertook his defence. He was under no uncertainty as to Catiline's
general character, or his particular guilt in the charge brought against
him. It was plain as the sun at midday.[4] But Cicero was about to stand
himself for the consulship, the object of his most passionate desire. He
had several competitors; and as he thought well of Catiline's prospects,
he intended to coalesce with him.[5] Catiline was acquitted, apparently
through a special selection of the judges, with the connivance of the
prosecutor. The canvass was violent, and the corruption flagrant.
[6]Cicero did not bribe himself, but if Catiline's voters would give him
a help, he was not so scrupulous as to be above taking advantage of it.
Catiline's humor or the circumstances of the time provided him with a more
honorable support. He required a more manageable colleague than he could
have found in Cicero. Among the candidates was one of Sylla's officers,
Caius Antonius, the uncle of Marc Antony, the triumvir. This Antonius had
been prosecuted by Caesar for ill-usage of the Macedonians. He had been
expelled by the censors from the Senate for general worthlessness; but
public disgrace seems to have had no effect whatever on the chances of a
candidate for the consulship in this singular age. Antonius was weak and
vicious, and Catiline could mould him as he pleased. He had made himself
popular by his profusion when aedile in providing shows for the mob. The
feeling against the Senate was so bitter that the aristocracy had no
chance of carrying a candidate of their own, and the competition was
reduced at last to Catiline, Antonius and Cicero. Antonius was certain of
his election, and the contest lay between Catiline and Cicero. Each of
them tried to gain the support of Antonius and his friends. Catiline
promised Antonius a revolution, in which they were to share the world
between them. Cicero promised his influence to obtain some lucrative
province for Antonius to misgovern. Catiline would probably have
succeeded, when the aristocracy, knowing what to expect if so scandalous a
pair came into office, threw their weight on Cicero's side and turned the
scale. Cicero was liked among the people for his prosecution of Verres,
for his support of the Manilian law, and for the boldness with which he
had exposed patrician delinquencies. With the Senate for him also, he was
returned at the head of the poll. The proud Roman nobility had selected a
self-made lawyer as their representative. Cicero was consul, and Antonius
with him. Catiline had failed. It was the turning-point of Cicero's life.
Before his consulship he had not irrevocably taken a side. No public
speaker had more eloquently shown the necessity for reform; no one had
denounced with keener sarcasm the infamies and follies of senatorial
favorites. Conscience and patriotism should have alike held him to the
reforming party; and political instinct, if vanity had left him the use of
his perception, would have led him in the same direction. Possibly before
he received the votes of the patricians and their clients he had bound
himself with certain engagements to them. Possibly he held the Senate's
intellect cheap, and saw the position which he could arrive at among the
aristocracy if he offered them his services. The strongest intellect was
with the reformers, and first on that side he could never be. First among
the Conservatives[7] he could easily be; and he might prefer being at
the head of a party which at heart he despised, to working at the side of
persons who must stand inevitably above him. We may regret that gifted men
should be influenced by personal considerations, but under party
government it is a fact that they are so influenced, and will be as long
as it continues. Caesar and Pompey were soldiers. The army was democratic,
and the triumph of the democracy meant the rule of a popular general.
Cicero was a civilian, and a man of speech. In the forum and in the Curia
he knew that he could reign supreme.

Cicero had thus reached the highest step in the scale of promotion by
trimming between the rival factions. Caesar was rising simultaneously
behind him on lines of his own. In the year B.C. 65 he had been aedile,
having for his colleague Bibulus, his future companion on the successive
grades of ascent. Bibulus was a rich plebeian, whose delight in office was
the introduction which it gave him into the society of the great; and in
his politics he outdid his aristocratic patrons. The aediles had charge of
the public buildings and the games and exhibitions in the capital. The
aedileship was a magistracy through which it was ordinarily necessary to
pass in order to reach the consulship; and as the aediles were expected to
bear their own expenses, the consulship was thus restricted to those who
could afford an extravagant outlay. They were expected to decorate the
city with new ornaments, and to entertain the people with magnificent
spectacles. If they fell short of public expectation, they need look no
further for the suffrages of their many-headed master. Cicero had slipped
through the aedileship, without ruin to himself. He was a self-raised man,
known to be dependent upon his own exertions, and liked from the
willingness with which he gave his help to accused persons on their
trials. Thus no great demands had been made upon him. Caesar, either more
ambitious or less confident in his services, raised a new and costly row
of columns in front of the Capitol. He built a temple to the Dioscuri, and
he charmed the populace with a show of gladiators unusually extensive.
Personally he cared nothing for these sanguinary exhibitions, and he
displayed his indifference ostentatiously by reading or writing while the
butchery was going forward.[8] But he required the favor of the
multitude, and then, as always, took the road which led most directly to
his end. The noble lords watched him suspiciously, and their uneasiness
was not diminished when, not content with having produced the insignia of
Marius at his aunt's funeral, he restored the trophies for the victories
over the Cimbri and Teutons, which had been removed by Sylla. The name of
Marius was growing every day more dear to the popular party. They forgave,
if they had ever resented, his credulities. His veterans who had fought
with him through his campaigns came forward in tears to salute the honored
relics of their once glorious commander.

As he felt the ground stronger under his feet, Caesar now began to assume
an attitude more peremptorily marked. He had won a reputation in the
Forum; he had spoken in the Senate; he had warmly advocated the
appointment of Pompey to his high commands; and he was regarded as a
prominent democratic leader. But he had not aspired to the tribunate; he
had not thrown himself into politics with any absorbing passion. His
exertions had been intermittent, and he was chiefly known as a brilliant
member of fashionable society, a peculiar favorite with women, and
remarkable for his abstinence from the coarse debauchery which disgraced
his patrician contemporaries. He was now playing for a higher stake, and
the oligarchy had occasion to be reminded of Sylla's prophecy. In carrying
out the proscription, Sylla had employed professional assassins, and
payments had been made out of the treasury to wretches who came to him
with bloody trophies in their hands to demand the promised fees. The time
had come when these doings were to be looked into; hundreds of men had
been murdered, their estates confiscated, and their families ruined, who
had not been even ostensibly guilty of any public crime. At Caesar's
instance an inquiry was ordered. He himself was appointed Judex
Quaestionis, or chairman of a committee of investigation; and Catiline,
among others, was called to answer for himself--a curious commentary on
Caesar's supposed connection with him.

[Sidenote: B.C. 63.]
Nor did the inquisition stop with Sylla. Titus Labienus, afterward so
famous and so infamous, was then tribune of the people. His father had
been killed at the side of Saturninus and Glaucia thirty-seven years
before, when the young lords of Rome had unroofed the senate-house, and
had pelted them and their companions to death with tiles. One of the
actors in the scene, Caius Rabirius, now a very old man, was still alive.
Labienus prosecuted him before Caesar. Rabirius was condemned, and
appealed to the people; and Cicero, who had just been made consul, spoke
in his defence. On this occasion Cicero for the first time came actively
in collision with Caesar. His language contrasted remarkably with the tone
of his speeches against Verres and for the Manilian law. It was adroit,
for he charged Marius with having shared the guilt, if guilt there had
been, in the death of those men; but the burden of what he said was to
defend enthusiastically the conservative aristocracy, and to censure with
all his bitterness the democratic reformers. Rabirius was acquitted,
perhaps justly. It was a hard thing to revive the memory of a political
crime which had been shared by the whole patrician order after so long an
interval. But Cicero had shown his new colors; no help, it was evident,
was thenceforward to be expected from him in the direction of reform. The
popular party replied in a singular manner. The office of Pontifex Maximus
was the most coveted of all the honors to which a Roman citizen could
aspire. It was held for life, it was splendidly endowed, and there still
hung about the pontificate the traditionary dignity attaching to the chief
of the once sincerely believed Roman religion. Like other objects of
ambition, the nomination had fallen, with the growth of democracy, to the
people, but the position had always been held by some member of the old
aristocracy; and Sylla, to secure them in the possession of it, had
reverted to the ancient constitution, and had restored to the Sacred
College the privilege of choosing their head. Under the impulse which the
popular party had received from Pompey's successes, Labienus carried a
vote in the assembly, by which the people resumed the nomination to the
pontificate themselves. In the same year it fell vacant by the death of
the aged Metullus Pius. Two patricians, Quintus Catulus and Caesar's old
general Servilius Isauricus, were the Senate's candidates, and vast sums
were subscribed and spent to secure the success of one or other of the
two. Caesar came forward to oppose them. Caesar aspired to be Pontifex
Maximus--Pope of Rome--he who of all men living was the least given to
illusion; he who was the most frank in his confession of entire disbelief
in the legends which, though few credited them any more, yet almost all
thought it decent to pretend to credit. Among the phenomena of the time
this was surely the most singular. Yet Caesar had been a priest from his
boyhood, and why should he not be Pope? He offered himself to the Comitia.
Committed as he was to a contest with the richest men in Rome, he spent
money freely. He was in debt already for his expenses as aedile. He
engaged his credit still deeper for this new competition. The story ran
that when his mother kissed him as he was leaving his home for the Forum
on the morning of the election, he told her that he would return as
pontiff, or she would never see him more. He was chosen by an overwhelming
majority, the votes given for him being larger than the collective numbers
of the votes entered for his opponents.

[Sidenote: B.C. 63.]
The election for the pontificate was on the 6th of March, and soon after
Caesar received a further evidence of popular favor on being chosen
praetor for the next year. As the liberal party was growing in courage and
definiteness, Cicero showed himself more decidedly on the other side. Now
was the time for him, highly placed as he was, to prevent a repetition of
the scandals which he had so eloquently denounced, to pass laws which no
future Verres or Lucullus could dare to defy. Now was his opportunity to
take the wind out of the reformers' sails, and to grapple himself with the
thousand forms of patrician villainy which he well knew to be destroying
the Commonwealth. Not one such measure, save an ineffectual attempt to
check election bribery, distinguished the consulship of Cicero. His entire
efforts were directed to the combination in a solid phalanx of the
equestrian and patrician orders. The danger to society, he had come to
think, was an approaching war against property, and his hope was to unite
the rich of both classes in defence against the landless and moneyless
multitudes.[9] The land question had become again as pressing as in the
time of the Gracchi. The peasant proprietors were melting away as fast as
ever, and Rome was becoming choked with impoverished citizens, who ought
to have been farmers and fathers of families, but were degenerating into a
rabble fed upon the corn grants, and occupied with nothing but spectacles
and politics. The agrarian laws in the past had been violent, and might
reasonably be complained of; but a remedy could now be found for this
fast-increasing mischief without injury to anyone. Pompey's victories had
filled the public treasury. Vast territories abroad had lapsed to the
possession of the State; and Rullus, one of the tribunes, proposed that
part of these territories should be sold, and that out of the proceeds,
and out of the money which Pompey had sent home, farms should be purchased
in Italy and poor citizens settled upon them. Rullus's scheme might have
been crude, and the details of it objectionable; but to attempt the
problem was better than to sit still and let the evil go unchecked. If the
bill was impracticable in its existing form, it might have been amended;
and so far as the immediate effect of such a law was concerned, it was
against the interests of the democrats. The popular vote depended for its
strength on the masses of poor who were crowded into Rome; and the tribune
was proposing to weaken his own army. But the very name of an agrarian law
set patrician households in a flutter, and Cicero stooped to be their
advocate. He attacked Rullus with brutal sarcasm. He insulted his
appearance; he ridiculed his dress, his hair, and his beard. He mocked at
his bad enunciation and bad grammar. No one more despised the mob than
Cicero; but because Rullus had said that the city rabble was dangerously
powerful, and ought to be "drawn off" to some wholesome employment, the
eloquent consul condescended to quote the words, to score a point against
his opponent; and he told the crowd that their tribune had described a
number of excellent citizens to the Senate as no better than the contents
of a cesspool.[10]

By these methods Cicero caught the people's voices. The plan came to
nothing, and his consulship would have waned away, undistinguished by any
act which his country would have cared to remember, but for an accident
which raised him for a moment into a position of real consequence, and
impressed on his own mind a conviction that he was a second Romulus.

Revolutionary conspiracies are only formidable when the government against
which they are directed is already despised and detested. As long as an
administration is endurable the majority of citizens prefer to bear with
it, and will assist in repressing violent attempts at its overthrow. Their
patience, however, may be exhausted, and the disgust may rise to a point
when any change may seem an improvement. Authority is no longer shielded
by the majesty with which it ought to be surrounded. It has made public
its own degradation; and the most worthless adventurer knows that he has
no moral indignation to fear if he tries to snatch the reins out of hands
which are at least no more pure than his own. If he can dress his
endeavors in the livery of patriotism, if he can put himself forward as
the champion of an injured people, he can cover the scandals of his own
character and appear as a hero and a liberator. Catiline had missed the
consulship, and was a ruined man. He had calculated on succeeding to a
province where he might gather a golden harvest and come home to live in
splendor, like Lucullus. He had failed, defeated by a mere plebeian whom
his brother-patricians had stooped to prefer to him. Were the secret
history known of the contest for the consulship, much might be discovered
there to explain Cicero's and Catiline's hatred of each other. Cicero had
once thought of coalescing with Catiline, notwithstanding his knowledge of
his previous crimes: Catiline had perhaps hoped to dupe Cicero, and had
been himself outwitted. He intended to stand again for the year 62, but
evidently on a different footing from that on which he had presented
himself before. That such a man should have been able to offer himself at
all, and that such a person as Cicero should have entered into any kind of
amicable relations with him, was a sign by itself that the Commonwealth
was already sickening for death.

Catiline was surrounded by men of high birth, whose fortunes were
desperate as his own. There was Lentulus, who had been consul a few years
before, and had been expelled from the Senate by the censors. There was
Cethegus, staggering under a mountain of debts. There was Autronius, who
had been unseated for bribery when chosen consul in 65. There was Manlius,
once a distinguished officer in Sylla's army, and now a beggar. Besides
these were a number of senators, knights, gentlemen, and dissolute young
patricians, whose theory of the world was that it had been created for
them to take their pleasure in, and who found their pleasures shortened by
emptiness of purse. To them, as to their betters, the Empire was but a
large dish out of which they considered that they had a right to feed
themselves. They were defrauded of their proper share, and Catiline was
the person who would help them to it.

Etruria was full of Sylla's disbanded soldiers, who had squandered their
allotments, and were hanging about, unoccupied and starving. Catiline sent
down Manlius, their old officer, to collect as many as he could of them
without attracting notice. He himself, as the election day approached, and
Cicero's year of office was drawing to an end, took up the character of an
aristocratic demagogue, and asked for the suffrages of the people as the
champion of the poor against the rich, as the friend of the wretched and
oppressed; and those who thought themselves wretched and oppressed in Rome
were so large a body, and so bitterly hostile were they all to the
prosperous classes, that his election was anticipated as a certainty. In
the Senate the consulship of Catiline was regarded as no less than an
impending national calamity. Marcus Cato, great-grandson of the censor,
then growing into fame by his acrid tongue and narrow republican
fanaticism, who had sneered at Pompey's victories as triumphs over women,
and had not spared even Cicero himself, threatened Catiline in the Curia.
Catiline answered, in a fully attended house, that if any agitation was
kindled against him he would put it out, not with water, but with
revolution. His language became so audacious that, on the eve of the
election day, Cicero moved for a postponement, that the Senate might take
his language into consideration. Catiline's conduct was brought on for
debate, and the consul called on him to explain himself. There was no
concealment in Catiline. Then and always Cicero admits he was perfectly
frank. He made no excuses. He admitted the truth of what had been reported
of him. The State, he said, had two bodies, one weak (the aristocracy),
with a weak leader (Cicero); the other, the great mass of the citizens--
strong in themselves, but without a head, and he himself intended to be
that head.[11] A groan was heard in the house, but less loud than in
Cicero's opinion it ought to have been; and Catiline sailed out in
triumph, leaving the noble lords looking in each other's faces.

[Sidenote: October, B.C. 63.]
Both Cicero and the Senate were evidently in the greatest alarm that
Catiline would succeed constitutionally in being chosen consul, and they
strained every sinew to prevent so terrible a catastrophe. When the
Comitia came on, Cicero admits that he occupied the voting place in the
Campus Martius with a guard of men who could be depended on. He was
violating the law, which forbade the presence of an armed force on those
occasions. He excused himself by pretending that Catiline's party intended
violence, and he appeared ostentatiously in a breastplate as if his own
life was aimed at. The result was that Catiline failed once more, and was
rejected by a small majority. Cicero attributes his defeat to the moral
effect produced by the breastplate. But from the time of the Gracchi
downwards the aristocracy had not hesitated to lay pressure on the
elections when they could safely do it; and the story must be taken with
reservation, in the absence of a more impartial account than we possess of
the purpose to which Cicero's guard was applied. Undoubtedly it was
desirable to strain the usual rules to keep a wretch like Catiline from
the consulship; but as certainly, both before the election and after it,
Catiline had the sympathies of a very large part of the resident
inhabitants of the city, and these sympathies must be taken into account
if we are to understand the long train of incidents of which this occasion
was the beginning.

Two strict aristocrats, Decimus Silanus and Lucius Murena,[12] were
declared elected. Pompey was on his way home, but had not yet reached
Italy. There were no regular troops in the whole peninsula, and the
nearest approach to an army was the body of Syllans, whom Manlius had
quietly collected at Fiesole. Cicero's colleague Antonius was secretly in
communication with Catiline, evidently thinking it likely that he would
succeed. Catiline determined to wait no longer, and to raise an
insurrection in the capital, with slave emancipation and a cancelling of
debt for a cry. Manlius was to march on Rome, and the Senate, it was
expected, would fall without a blow. Caesar and Crassus sent a warning to
Cicero to be on his guard. Caesar had called Catiline to account for his
doings at the time of the proscription, and knew his nature too well to
expect benefit to the people from a revolution conducted under the
auspices of bankrupt patrician adventurers. No citizen had more to lose
than Crassus from a crusade of the poor against the rich. But they had
both been suspected two years before, and in the excited temper of men's
minds they took precautions for their own reputation's sake, as well as
for the safety of the State. Quintus Curius, a senator, who was one of the
conspirators, was meanwhile betraying his accomplices, and gave daily
notice to the consuls of each step which was contemplated. But so weak was
authority and so dangerous the temper of the people that the difficulty
was to know what to do. Secret information was scarcely needed. Catiline,
as Cicero said, was "_apertissimus_," most frank in the declaration
of his intentions. Manlius's army at Fiesole was an open fact, and any day
might bring news that he was on the march to Rome. The Senate, as usual in
extreme emergencies, declared the State in danger, and gave the consuls
unlimited powers to provide for public security. So scornfully confident
was Catiline that he offered to place himself under surveillance at the
house of any senator whom Cicero might name, or to reside with Cicero
himself, if the consul preferred to keep a personal eye upon him. Cicero
answered that he dared not trust himself with so perilous a guest.

[Sidenote: November, B.C. 63.]
So for a few days matters hung in suspense, Manlius expecting an order to
advance, Catiline waiting apparently for a spontaneous insurrection in the
city before he gave the word. Intended attempts at various points had been
baffled by Cicero's precautions. At last, finding that the people remained
quiet, Catiline called a meeting of his friends one stormy night at the
beginning of November, and it was agreed that two of the party should go
the next morning at dawn to Cicero's house, demand to see him on important
business, and kill him in his bed. Curius, who was present, immediately
furnished Cicero with an account of what had passed. When his morning
visitors arrived they were told that they could not be admitted; and a
summons was sent round to the senators to assemble immediately at the
Temple of Jupiter Stator, one of the strongest positions in the city.[13]
The audacious Catiline attended, and took his usual seat; every one shrank
from him, and he was left alone on the bench. Then Cicero rose. In the
Senate, where to speak was the first duty of man, he was in his proper
element, and had abundant courage. He addressed himself personally to the
principal conspirator. He exposed, if exposure be the fitting word when
half the persons present knew as much as he could tell them, the history
of Catiline's proceedings. He described in detail the meeting of the past
evening, looking round perhaps in the faces of the senators who he was
aware had been present at it. He spoke of the visit designed to himself in
the morning, which had been baffled by his precautions. He went back over
the history of the preceding half-century. Fresh from the defence of
Rabirius, he showed how dangerous citizens, the Gracchi, Saturninus,
Glaucia, had been satisfactorily killed when they were meditating
mischief. He did not see that a constitution was already doomed when the
ruling powers were driven to assassinate their opponents, because a trial
with the forms of law would have ended in their acquittal. He told
Catiline that under the powers which the Senate had conferred on him he
might order his instant execution. He detailed Catiline's past enormities,
which he had forgotten when he sought his friendship, and he ended in
bidding him leave the city, go and join Manlius and his army.

Never had Cicero been greater, and never did oratory end in a more absurd
conclusion. He dared not arrest Catiline. He confessed that he dared not.
There was not a doubt that Catiline was meditating a revolution--but a
revolution was precisely what half the world was wishing for. Rightly
read, those sounding paragraphs, those moral denunciations, those appeals
to history and patriotic sentiment, were the funeral knell of the Roman
Commonwealth.

Let Catiline go into open war, Cicero said, and then there would no longer
be a doubt. Then all the world would admit his treason. Catiline went; and
what was to follow next? Antonius, the second consul, was notoriously not
to be relied on. The other conspirators, senators who sat listening while
Cicero poured out his eloquent indignation, remained still in the city
with the threads of insurrection in their hands, and were encouraged to
persevere by the evident helplessness of the government. The imperfect
record of history retains for us only the actions of a few individuals
whom special talent or special circumstances distinguished, and such
information is only fragmentary. We lose sight of the unnamed seething
multitudes by whose desires and by whose hatreds the stream of events was
truly guided. The party of revolution was as various as it was wide.
Powerful wealthy men belonged to it, who were politically dissatisfied;
ambitious men of rank, whose money embarrassments weighted them in the
race against their competitors; old officers and soldiers of Sylla, who
had spent the fortunes which they had won by violence, and were now trying
to bring him back from the dead to renew their lease of plunder; ruined
wretches without number, broken down with fines and proscriptions, and
debts and the accumulation of usurious interest. Add to these "the
dangerous classes," the natural enemies of all governments--parricides,
adulterers, thieves, forgers, escaped slaves, brigands, and pirates who
had lost their occupation; and, finally, Catiline's own chosen comrades,
the smooth-faced patrician youths with curled hair and redolent with
perfumes, as yet beardless or with the first down upon their chins,
wearing scarves and veils and sleeved tunics reaching to their ankles,
industrious but only with the dice-box, night-watchers but in the supper-
rooms, in the small hours before dawn, immodest, dissolute boys, whose
education had been in learning to love and to be loved, to sing and to
dance naked at the midnight orgies, and along with it to handle poniards
and mix poisoned bowls.[14]

[Sidenote: November, B.C. 64.]
Well might Cicero be alarmed at such a combination; well might he say that
if a generation of such youths lived to manhood there would be a
commonwealth of Catilines. But what was to be thought of the prospects of
a society in which such phenomena were developing themselves? Cicero bade
them all go--follow their chief into the war, and perish in the snow of
the Apennines. But how if they would not go? How if from the soil of Rome,
under the rule of his friends the Senate, fresh crops of such youths would
rise perennially? The Commonwealth needed more drastic medicine than
eloquent exhortations, however true the picture might be.

[Sidenote: November, B.C. 63.]
None of the promising young gentlemen took Cicero's advice. Catiline went
alone and joined Manlius, and had he come on at once he might perhaps have
taken Rome. The army was to support an insurrection, and the insurrection
was to support the army. Catiline waited for a signal from his friends in
the city, and Lentulus, Cethegus, Autronius, and the rest of the leaders
waited for Catiline to arrive. Conspirators never think that they have
taken precautions enough or have gained allies enough; and in endeavoring
to secure fresh support they made a fatal mistake. An embassy of
Allobroges was in the city, a frontier tribe on the borders of the Roman
province in Gaul, who were allies of Rome, though not as yet subjects. The
Gauls were the one foreign nation whom the Romans really feared. The
passes of the Alps alone protected Italy from the hordes of German or
Gallic barbarians, whose numbers being unknown were supposed to be
exhaustless. Middle-aged men could still remember the panic at the
invasion of the Cimbri and Teutons, and it was the chief pride of the
democrats that the State had then been saved by their own Marius. At the
critical moment it was discovered that the conspirators had entered into a
correspondence with these Allobroges, and had actually proposed to them to
make a fresh inroad over the Alps. The suspicion of such an intention at
once alienated from Catiline the respectable part of the democratic party.
The fact of the communication was betrayed to Cicero. He intercepted the
letters; he produced them in the Senate with the seals unbroken, that no
suspicion might rest upon himself. Lentulus and Cethegus were sent for,
and could not deny their hands. The letters were then opened and read, and
no shadow of uncertainty any longer remained that they had really designed
to bring in an army of Gauls. Such of the conspirators as were known and
were still within reach were instantly seized.

[Sidenote: December 5, B.C. 63.]
Cicero, with a pardonable laudation of himself and of the Divine
Providence of which he professed to regard himself as the minister,
congratulated his country on its escape from so genuine a danger; and he
then invited the Senate to say what was to be done with these apostates
from their order, whose treason was now demonstrated. A plot for a mere
change of government, for the deposition of the aristocrats and the return
to power of the popular party, it might be impolitic, perhaps impossible,
severely to punish; but Catiline and his friends had planned the betrayal
of the State to the barbarians; and with persons who had committed
themselves to national treason there was no occasion to hesitate. Cicero
produced the list of those whom he considered guilty, and there were some
among his friends who thought the opportunity might be used to get rid of
dangerous enemies, after the fashion of Sylla, especially of Crassus and
Caesar. The name of Crassus was first mentioned, some said by secret
friends of Catiline, who hoped to alarm the Senate into inaction by
showing with whom they would have to deal. Crassus, it is possible, knew
more than he had told the consul. Catiline's success had, at one moment,
seemed assured; and great capitalists are apt to insure against
contingencies. But Cicero moved and carried a resolution that the charge
against him was a wicked invention. The attempt against Caesar was more
determined. Old Catulus, whom Caesar had defeated in the contest for the
pontificate, and Caius Calpurnius Piso,[15] a bitter aristocrat, whom
Caesar had prosecuted for misgovernment in Gaul, urged Cicero to include
his name. But Cicero was too honorable to lend himself to an accusation
which he knew to be false. Some of the young lords in their disappointment
threatened Caesar at the senate-house door with their swords; but the
attack missed its mark, and served only to show how dreaded Caesar already
was, and how eager a desire there was to make an end of him.

The list submitted for judgment contained the names of none but those who
were indisputably guilty. The Senate voted at once that they were traitors
to the State. The next question was of the nature of their punishment. In
the first place the persons of public officers were sacred, and Lentulus
was at the time a praetor. And next the Sempronian law forbade distinctly
that any Roman citizen should be put to death without a trial, and without
the right of appeal to the assembly.[16] It did not mean simply that
Roman citizens were not to be murdered, or that at any time it had been
supposed that they might. The object was to restrain the extraordinary
power claimed by the Senate of setting the laws aside on exceptional
occasions. Silanus, the consul-elect for the following year, was,
according to usage, asked to give his opinion first. He voted for
immediate death. One after the other the voices were the same, till the
turn came of Tiberius Nero, the great-grandfather of Nero the Emperor.
Tiberius was against haste. He advised that the prisoners should be kept
in confinement till Catiline was taken or killed, and that the whole
affair should then be carefully investigated. Investigation was perhaps
what many senators were most anxious to avoid. When Tiberius had done,
Caesar rose. The speech which Sallust places in his mouth was not an
imaginary sketch of what Sallust supposed him likely to have said, but the
version generally received of what he actually did say, and the most
important passages of it are certainly authentic. For the first time we
see through the surface of Caesar's outward actions into his real mind.
During the three quarters of a century which had passed since the death of
the elder Gracchus one political murder had followed upon another. Every
conspicuous democrat had been killed by the aristocrats in some convenient
disturbance. No constitution could survive when the law was habitually set
aside by violence; and disdaining the suspicion with which he knew that
his words would be regarded, Caesar warned the Senate against another act
of precipitate anger which would be unlawful in itself, unworthy of their
dignity, and likely in the future to throw a doubt upon the guilt of the
men upon whose fate they were deliberating. He did not extenuate, he
rather emphasized, the criminality of Catiline and his confederates; but
for that reason and because for the present no reasonable person felt the
slightest uncertainty about it, he advised them to keep within the lines
which the law had marked out for them. He spoke with respect of Silanus.
He did not suppose him to be influenced by feelings of party animosity.
Silanus had recommended the execution of the prisoners, either because he
thought their lives incompatible with the safety of the State, or because
no milder punishment seemed adequate to the enormity of their conduct. But
the safety of the State, he said, with a compliment to Cicero, had been
sufficiently provided for by the diligence of the consul. As to
punishment, none could be too severe; but with that remarkable adherence
to _fact_, which always distinguished Caesar, that repudiation of
illusion and sincere utterance of his real belief, whatever that might be,
he contended that death was not a punishment at all. Death was the end of
human suffering. In the grave there was neither joy nor sorrow. When a man
was dead he ceased to be.[17]He became as he had been before he was born.
Probably almost every one in the Senate thought like Caesar on this
subject. Cicero certainly did. The only difference was that plausible
statesmen affected a respect for the popular superstition, and pretended
to believe what they did not believe. Caesar spoke his convictions out.
There was no longer any solemnity in an execution. It was merely the
removal out of the way of troublesome persons; and convenient as such a
method might be, it was of graver consequence that the Senate of Rome, the
guardians of the law, should not set an example of violating the law.
Illegality, Caesar told them, would be followed by greater illegalities.
He reminded them how they had applauded Sylla, how they had rejoiced when
they saw their political enemies summarily despatched; and yet the
proscription, as they well knew, had been perverted to the license of
avarice and private revenge. They might feel sure that no such consequence
need be feared under their present consul: but times might change. The
worst crimes which had been committed in Rome in the past century had
risen out of the imitation of precedents, which at the moment seemed
defensible. The laws had prescribed a definite punishment for treason.
Those laws had been gravely considered; they had been enacted by the great
men who had built up the Roman dominion, and were not to be set aside in
impatient haste. Caesar therefore recommended that the estates of the
conspirators should be confiscated, that they themselves should be kept in
strict and solitary confinement dispersed in various places, and that a
resolution should be passed forbidding an application for their pardon
either to Senate or people.

The speech was weighty in substance and weightily delivered, and it
produced its effect.[18] Silanus withdrew his opinion. Quintus Cicero,
the consul's brother, followed, and a clear majority of the Senate went
with them, till it came to the turn of a young man who in that year had
taken his place in the house for the first time, who was destined to make
a reputation which could be set in competition with that of the gods
themselves, and whose moral opinion could be held superior to that of the
gods.[19]

Marcus Porcius Cato was born in the year 95, and was thus five years
younger than Caesar and eleven years younger than Cicero. He was the
great-grandson, as was said above, of the stern rugged censor who hated
Greek, preferred the teaching of the plough-tail and the Twelve Tables to
the philosophy of Aristotle, disbelieved in progress, and held by the
maxims of his father--the last, he of the Romans of the old type. The
young Marcus affected to take his ancestor for a pattern. He resembled him
as nearly as a modern Anglican monk resembles St. Francis or St. Bernard.
He could reproduce the form, but it was the form with the life gone out of
it. He was immeasurably superior to the men around him. He was virtuous,
if it be virtue to abstain from sin. He never lied. No one ever suspected
him of dishonesty or corruption. But his excellences were not of the
retiring sort. He carried them written upon him in letters for all to
read, as a testimony to a wicked generation. His opinions were as pedantic
as his life was abstemious, and no one was permitted to differ from him
without being held guilty rather of a crime than of a mistake. He was an
aristocratic pedant, to whom the living forces of humanity seemed but
irrational impulses of which he and such as he were the appointed school-
masters. To such a temperament a man of genius is instinctively hateful.
Cato had spoken often in the Senate, though so young a member of it,
denouncing the immoral habits of the age. He now rose to match himself
against Caesar; and with passionate vehemence he insisted that the
wretches who had plotted the overthrow of the State should be immediately
killed. He noticed Caesar's objections only to irritate the suspicion in
which he probably shared, that Caesar himself was one of Catiline's
accomplices. That Caesar had urged as a reason for moderation the absence
of immediate danger, was in Cato's opinion an argument the more for
anxiety. Naturally, too, he did not miss the opportunity of striking at
the scepticism which questioned future retribution. Whether Cato believed
himself in a future life mattered little, if Caesar's frank avowal could
be turned to his prejudice.

Cato spoke to an audience well disposed to go with him. Silanus went round
to his first view, and the mass of senators followed him. Caesar attempted
to reply; but so fierce were the passions that had been roused, that again
he was in danger of violence. The young knights who were present as a
senatorial guard rushed at him with their drawn swords. A few friends
protected him with their cloaks, and he left the Curia not to enter it
again for the rest of the year. When Caesar was gone, Cicero rose to
finish the debate. He too glanced at Caesar's infidelity, and as Caesar
had spoken of the wisdom of past generations, he observed that in the same
generations there had been a pious belief that the grave was not the end
of human existence. With an ironical compliment to the prudence of
Caesar's advice, he said that his own interest would lead him to follow
it; he would have the less to fear from the irritation of the people. The
Senate, he observed, must have heard with pleasure that Caesar condemned
the conspiracy. Caesar was the leader of the popular party, and from him
at least they now knew that they had nothing to fear. The punishment which
Caesar recommended was, in fact, Cicero admitted, more severe than death.
He trusted, therefore, that if the conspirators were executed, and he had
to answer to the people for the sentence to be passed upon them, Caesar
himself would defend him against the charge of cruelty. Meanwhile he said
that he had the ineffable satisfaction of knowing that he had saved the
State. The Senate might adopt such resolutions as might seem good to them
without alarm for the consequences. The conspiracy was disarmed. He had
made enemies among the bad citizens; but he had deserved and he had won
the gratitude of the good, and he stood secure behind the impregnable
bulwark of his country's love.

So Cicero, in the first effusion of self-admiration with which he never
ceased to regard his conduct on this occasion. No doubt he had acted
bravely, and he had shown as much adroitness as courage. But the whole
truth was never told. The Senate's anxiety to execute the prisoners arose
from a fear that the people would be against them if an appeal to the
assembly was allowed. The Senate was contending for the privilege of
suspending the laws by its own independent will; and the privilege, if it
was ever constitutional, had become so odious by the abuse of it, that to
a large section of Roman citizens a conspiracy against the oligarchy had
ceased to be looked on as treason at all. Cicero and Cato had their way.
Lentulus, Cethegus, Autronius and their companions were strangled in their
cells, on the afternoon of the debate upon their fate. A few weeks later
Catiline's army was cut to pieces, and he himself was killed. So
desperately his haggard bands had fought that they fell in their ranks
where they stood, and never Roman commander gained a victory that cost him
more dear. So furious a resistance implied a motive and a purpose beyond
any which Cicero or Sallust records, and the commission of inquiry
suggested by Tiberius Nero in the Senate might have led to curious
revelations. The Senate perhaps had its own reasons for fearing such
revelations, and for wishing the voices closed which could have made them.

[1] "Nunc quis patrem decem annorum natus non modo aufert sed tollit nisi
    veneno?"--_Varronis Fragmenta_, ed. Alexander Riese, p. 216.

[2] See the story in Cicero, _Pro Cluentio_.

[3] _Pro P. Sulla_, 4.

[4] "Catilina, si judicatum erit, meridie non lucere, certus erit
    competitor."--_Epist. ad Atticum_, i. 1.

[5] "Hoc tempore Catilinam, competitorem nostrum, defendere cogitamus.
    Judices habemus, quos volumus, summa accusatoris voluntate. Spero, si
    absolutus erit, conjunctiorem illum nobis fore in ratione
    petitionis."--_Ib_., i. 2.

[6] "Scito nihil tam exercitum nunc esse Romae quam candidatos omnibus
    iniquitatibus."--_Ib_., i. 11.

[7] I use a word apparently modern, but Cicero himself gave the name of
    Conservatores Reipublicae to the party to which he belonged.

[8] Suetonius, speaking of Augustus, says: "Quoties adesset, nihil
    praeterea agebat, seu vitandi rumoris causa, quo patrem Caesarem vulgo
    reprehensum commemorabat, quod inter spectandum epistolis libellisque
    legendis aut rescribendis vacaret; seu studio spectandi et voluptate,"
    etc.--_Vita Octavii_, 45.

[9] Writing three years later to Atticus, he says: "Confirmabam omnium
    privatorum possessiones, is enim est noster exercitus, ut tute scis
    locupletium."--_To Atticus_, i. 19. Pomponius Atticus, Cicero's
    most intimate correspondent, was a Roman knight, who inheriting a
    large estate from his father, increased it by contracts, banking,
    money-lending, and slave-dealing, in which he was deeply engaged.
    He was an accomplished, cultivated man, a shrewd observer of the
    times, and careful of committing himself on any side. His acquaintance
    with Cicero rested on similarity of temperament, with a solid
    financial basis at the bottom of it. They were mutually useful to
    each other.

[10] "Et nimium istud est, quod ab hoc tribuno plebis dictum est in
    senatu: urbanam plebem nimium in republica posse: exhauriendam esse:
    hoc enim verbo est usus; quasi de aliqua sentina, ac non de optimorum
    civium genere loqueretur."--_Contra Rullum_, ii. 26.

[11] Cicero, _Pro Murena_, 25.

[12] Murena was afterward prosecuted for bribery at this election. Cicero
    defended him; but even Cato, aristocrat as he was, affected to be
    shocked at the virtuous consul's undertaking so bad a case. It is
    observable that in his speech for Murena, Cicero found as many virtues
    in Lucullus as in his speech on the Manilian law he had found vices.
    It was another symptom of his change of attitude.

[13] "In loco munitissimo."

[14] This description of the young Roman aristocracy is given by Cicero in
    his most powerful vein: "Postremum autem genus est, non solum numero,
    verum etiam genere ipso atque vita, quod proprium est Catilinae, de
    ejus delectu, immo vero de complexu ejus ac sinu: quos pexo capillo,
    nitidos, aut imberbes, aut bene barbatos, videtis, manicatis et
    talaribus tunicis; velis amictos, non togis: quorum omnis industria
    vitae et vigilandi labor in antelucanis coenis expromitur. In his
    gregibus omnes aleatores, omnes adulteri, omnes impuri impudicique
    versantur. Hi pueri tam lepidi ac delicati non solum amare et amari
    neque cantare et saltare, sed etiam sicas vibrare et spargere venena
    didicerunt.... Nudi in conviviis saltare didicerunt."--_In
    Catilinam_, ii. 10. Compare _In Pisonem_, 10.

    The Romans shaved their beards at full maturity, and therefore
    "benebarbatos" does not mean grown men, but youths on the edge of
    manhood.

[15] Not to be confounded with Lucius Calpurnius Piso, who was Caesar's
    father-in-law.

[16] "Injussu populi."

[17] The real opinion of educated Romans on this subject was expressed in
    the well-known lines of Lucretius, which were probably written near
    this very time:

     "Nil igitur mors est, ad nos neque pertinet hilum,
     Quandoquidem natura animi mortalis habetur:
     Et, velut ante acto nil tempore sensimus aegri,
     Ad confligendum venientibus undique Poenis;
     Omnia cum belli trepido concussa tumultu,
     Horrida, contremuere sub altis aetheris auris;
     In dubioque fuit sub utrorum regna cadendum
     Omnibus humanis esset, terraque, marique:
     Sic, ubi non erimus, cum corporis atque animai
     Discidium fuerit, quibus e sumus uniter apti,
     Scilicet haud nobis quicquam, qui non erimus tum,
     Accidere omnino poterit, sensumque movere:
     Non, si terra mari miscebitur, et mare coelo."

     LUCRETIUS, lib. iii. 11. 842-854.

[18] In the following century when Caesar's life had become mythic, a
    story was current that when Caesar was speaking on this occasion a
    note was brought in to him, and Cato, suspecting that it referred to
    the conspiracy, insisted that it should be read. Caesar handed it to
    Cato, and it proved to be a love letter from Cato's sister, Servilia,
    the mother of Brutus. More will be said of the supposed liaison
    between Caesar and Servilia hereafter. For the present it is enough to
    say that there is no contemporary evidence for the story at all; and
    that if it be true that a note of some kind from Servilia was given to
    Caesar, it is more consistent with probability and the other
    circumstances of the case, that it was an innocent note of business.
    Ladies do not send in compromising letters to their lovers when they
    are on their feet in Parliament; nor, if such an accident should
    happen, do the lovers pass them over to be read by the ladies'
    brothers.

[19] "Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed victa Catoni."--LUCAN.




CHAPTER XII.


[Sidenote: B.C. 62.]
The execution of Lentulus and Cethegus was received in Rome with the
feeling which Caesar had anticipated. There was no active sympathy with
the conspiracy, but the conspiracy was forgotten in indignation at the
lawless action of the consul and the Senate. It was still violence--always
violence. Was law, men asked, never to resume its authority?--was the
Senate to deal at its pleasure with the lives and properties of
citizens?--criminals though they might be, what right had Cicero to
strangle citizens in dungeons without trial? If this was to be allowed,
the constitution was at an end; Rome was no longer a republic, but an
arbitrary oligarchy. Pompey's name was on every tongue. When would Pompey
come? Pompey, the friend of the people, the terror of the aristocracy!
Pompey, who had cleared the sea of pirates, and doubled the area of the
Roman dominions! Let Pompey return and bring his army with him, and give
to Rome the same peace and order which he had already given to the world.

A Roman commander, on landing in Italy after foreign service, was expected
to disband his legions, and relapse into the position of a private person.
A popular and successful general was an object of instinctive fear to the
politicians who held the reins of government. The Senate was never pleased
to see any individual too much an object of popular idolatry; and in the
case of Pompey their suspicion was the greater on account of the greatness
of his achievements, and because his command had been forced upon them by
the people, against their will. In the absence of a garrison, the city was
at the mercy of the patricians and their clients. That the noble lords
were unscrupulous in removing persons whom they disliked they had shown in
a hundred instances, and Pompey naturally enough hesitated to trust
himself among them without security. He required the protection of office,
and he had sent forward one of his most distinguished officers, Metellus
Nepos, to prepare the way and demand the consulship for him. Metellus, to
strengthen his hands, had stood for the tribuneship; and, in spite of the
utmost efforts of the aristocracy, had been elected. It fell to Metellus
to be the first to give expression to the general indignation in a way
peculiarly wounding to the illustrious consul. Cicero imagined that the
world looked upon him as its saviour. In his own eyes he was another
Romulus, a second founder of Rome. The world, unfortunately, had formed an
entirely different estimate of him. The prisoners had been killed on the
5th of December. On the last day of the year it was usual for the outgoing
consuls to review the events of their term of office before the Senate;
and Cicero had prepared a speech in which he had gilded his own
performances with all his eloquence. Metellus commenced his tribunate with
forbidding Cicero to deliver his oration, and forbidding him on the
special ground that a man who had put Roman citizens to death without
allowing them a hearing did not himself deserve to be heard. In the midst
of the confusion and uproar which followed, Cicero could only shriek that
he had saved his country: a declaration which could have been dispensed
with, since he had so often insisted upon it already without producing the
assent which he desired.

Notwithstanding his many fine qualities, Cicero was wanting in dignity.
His vanity was wounded in its tenderest point, and he attacked Metellus a
day or two after, in one of those violently abusive outpourings of which
so many specimens of his own survive, and which happily so few other
statesmen attempted to imitate. Metellus retorted with a threat of
impeaching Cicero, and the grave Roman Curia became no better than a
kennel of mad dogs. For days the storm raged on with no symptom of
abatement. At last Metellus turned to the people and proposed in the
assembly that Pompey should be recalled with his army to restore law and
order.

Caesar, who was now praetor, warmly supported Metellus. To him, if to no
one else, it was clear as the sun at noonday, that unless some better
government could be provided than could be furnished by five hundred such
gentlemen as the Roman senators, the State was drifting on to destruction.
Resolutions to be submitted to the people were generally first drawn in
writing, and were read from the Rostra. When Metellus produced his
proposal, Cato, who was a tribune also, sprang to his side, ordered him to
be silent, and snatched the scroll out of his hands. Metellus went on,
speaking from memory Cato's friends shut his mouth by force. The
patricians present drew their swords and cleared the Forum; and the
Senate, in the exercise of another right to which they pretended, declared
Caesar and Metullus degraded from their offices. Metullus, probably at
Caesar's advice, withdrew and went off to Asia, to describe what had
passed to Pompey. Caesar remained, and, quietly disregarding the Senate's
sentence, continued to sit and hear cases as praetor. His court was
forcibly closed. He yielded to violence and retired under protest, being
escorted to the door of his house by an enormous multitude. There he
dismissed his lictors and laid aside his official dress, that he might
furnish no excuse for a charge against him of resisting the established
authorities. The mob refused to be comforted. They gathered day after day.
They clustered about the pontifical palace. They cried to Caesar to place
himself at their head, that they might tear down the senate-house, and
turn the caitiffs into the street. Caesar neither then nor ever lent
himself to popular excesses. He reminded the citizens that if others broke
the law, they must themselves set an example of obeying it, and he bade
them return to their homes.

Terrified at the state of the city, and penitent for their injustice to
Caesar, the Senate hurriedly revoked their decree of deposition, sent a
deputation to him to apologize, and invited him to resume his place among
them. The extreme patrician section remained irreconcilable. Caesar
complied, but only to find himself denounced again with passionate
pertinacity as having been an accomplice of Catiline. Witnesses were
produced, who swore to having seen his signature to a treasonable bond.
Curius, Cicero's spy, declared that Catiline himself had told him that
Caesar was one of the conspirators. Caesar treated the charge with
indignant disdain. He appealed to Cicero's conscience, and Cicero was
obliged to say that he had derived his earliest and most important
information from Caesar himself. The most violent of his accusers were
placed under arrest. The informers, after a near escape from being
massacred by the crowd, were thrown into prison, and for the moment the
furious heats were able to cool.

All eyes were now turned to Pompey. The war in Asia was over. Pompey, it
was clear, must now return to receive the thanks of his countrymen; and as
he had triumphed in spite of the aristocracy, and as his victories could
neither be denied nor undone, the best hope of the Senate was to win him
over from the people, and to prevent a union between him and Caesar.
Through all the recent dissensions Caesar had thrown his weight on
Pompey's side. He, with Cicero, had urged Pompey's appointment to his
successive commands. When Cicero went over to the patricians, Caesar had
stood by Pompey's officers against the fury of the Senate. Caesar had the
people behind him, and Pompey the army. Unless in some way an apple of
discord could be thrown between them, the two favorites would overshadow
the State, and the Senate's authority would be gone. Nothing could be done
for the moment politically. Pompey owed his position to the democracy, and
he was too great as yet to fear Caesar as a rival in the Commonwealth. On
the personal side there was better hope. Caesar was as much admired in the
world of fashion as he was detested in the Curia. He had no taste for the
brutal entertainments and more brutal vices of male patrician society. He
preferred the companionship of cultivated women, and the noble lords had
the fresh provocation of finding their hated antagonist an object of
adoration to their wives and daughters. Here, at any rate, scandal had the
field to itself. Caesar was accused of criminal intimacy with many ladies
of the highest rank, and Pompey was privately informed that his friend had
taken advantage of his absence to seduce his wife, Mucia. Pompey was
Agamemnon; Caesar had been Aegisthus; and Pompey was so far persuaded that
Mucia had been unfaithful to him, that he divorced her before his return.

Charges of this kind have the peculiar advantage that even when disproved
or shown to be manifestly absurd, they leave a stain behind them. Careless
equally of probability and decency, the leaders of the Senate sacrificed
without scruple the reputation of their own relatives if only they could
make Caesar odious. The name of Servilia has been mentioned already.
Servilia was the sister of Marcus Cato and the mother of Marcus Brutus.
She was a woman of remarkable ability and character, and between her and
Caesar there was undoubtedly a close acquaintance and a strong mutual
affection. The world discovered that she was Caesar's mistress, and that
Brutus was his son. It might be enough to say that when Brutus was born
Caesar was scarcely fifteen years old, and that, if a later intimacy
existed between them, Brutus knew nothing of it or cared nothing for it.
When he stabbed Caesar at last it was not as a Hamlet or an Orestes, but
as a patriot sacrificing his dearest friend to his country. The same doubt
extends to the other supposed victims of Caesar's seductiveness. Names
were mentioned in the following century, but no particulars were given.
For the most part his alleged mistresses were the wives of men who
remained closely attached to him notwithstanding. The report of his
intrigue with Mucia answered its immediate purpose, in producing a
temporary coldness on Pompey's part toward Caesar; but Pompey must either
have discovered the story to be false or else have condoned it, for soon
afterward he married Caesar's daughter. Two points may be remarked about
these legends: first, that on no single occasion does Caesar appear to
have been involved in any trouble or quarrel on account of his love
affairs; and secondly, that, with the exception of Brutus and of
Cleopatra's Caesarion, whose claims to be Caesar's son were denied and
disproved, there is no record of any illegitimate children as the result
of these amours--a strange thing if Caesar was as liberal of his favors as
popular scandal pretended. It would be idle to affect a belief that Caesar
was particularly virtuous. He was a man of the world, living in an age as
corrupt as has been ever known. It would be equally idle to assume that
all the ink blots thrown upon him were certainly deserved, because we find
them in books which we call classical. Proof deserving to be called proof
there is none; and the only real evidence is the town talk of a society
which feared and hated Caesar, and was glad of every pretext to injure him
when alive, or to discredit him after his death. Similar stories have been
spread, are spread, and will be spread of every man who raises himself a
few inches above the level of his fellows. We know how it is with our
contemporaries. A single seed of fact will produce in a season or two a
harvest of calumnies, and sensible men pass such things by, and pay no
attention to them. With history we are less careful or less charitable. An
accusation of immorality is accepted without examination when brought
against eminent persons who can no longer defend themselves, and to raise
a doubt of its truth passes as a sign of a weak understanding. So let it
be. It is certain that Caesar's contemporaries spread rumors of a variety
of intrigues, in which they said that he was concerned. It is probable
that some were well founded. It is possible that all were well founded.
But it is no less indubitable that they rest on evidence which is not
evidence at all, and that the most innocent intimacies would not have
escaped misrepresentation from the venomous tongues of Roman society.
Caesar comes into court with a fairer character than those whose virtues
are thought to overshadow him. Marriage, which under the ancient Romans
was the most sacred of ties, had become the lightest and the loosest.
Cicero divorced Tereutia when she was old and ill-tempered, and married a
young woman. Cato made over his Marcia, the mother of his children, to his
friend Hortensius, and took her back as a wealthy widow when Hortensius
died. Pompey put away his first wife at Sylla's bidding, and took a second
who was already the wife of another man. Caesar, when little more than a
boy, dared the Dictator's displeasure rather than condescend to a similar
compliance. His worst enemies admitted that from the gluttony, the
drunkenness, and the viler forms of sensuality, which were then so common,
he was totally free. For the rest, it is certain that no friend ever
permanently quarrelled with him on any question of domestic injury; and
either there was a general indifference on such subjects, which lightens
the character of the sin, or popular scandals in old Rome were of no
sounder material than we find them composed of in other countries and in
other times.

Turning from scandal to reality, we come now to a curious incident, which
occasioned a fresh political convulsion, where Caesar appears, not as an
actor in an affair of gallantry, but as a sufferer.

Pompey was still absent. Caesar had resumed his duties as praetor, and was
living in the official house of the Pontifex Maximus, with his mother
Aurelia and his wife Pompeia. The age was fertile of new religions. The
worship of the Bona Dea, a foreign goddess of unknown origin, had recently
been introduced into Rome, and an annual festival was held in her honor in
the house of one or other of the principal magistrates. The Vestal virgins
officiated at the ceremonies, and women only were permitted to be present.
This year the pontifical palace was selected for the occasion, and
Caesar's wife Pompeia was to preside.

The reader may remember a certain youth named Clodius, who had been with
Lucullus in Asia, and had been a chief instigator of the mutiny in his
army. He was Lucullus's brother-in-law, a member of the Claudian family, a
patrician of the patricians, and connected by blood and marriage with the
proudest members of the Senate. If Cicero is to be believed, he had
graduated even while a boy in every form of vice, natural and unnatural.
He was bold, clever, unprincipled, and unscrupulous, with a slender
diminutive figure and a delicate woman's face. His name was Clodius
Pulcher. Cicero played upon it and called him Pulchellus Puer, "the pretty
boy." Between this promising young man and Caesar's wife Pompeia there had
sprung up an acquaintance, which Clodius was anxious to press to further
extremes. Pompeia was difficult of access, her mother-in-law Aurelia
keeping a strict watch over her; and Clodius, who was afraid of nothing,
took advantage of the Bona Dea festival to make his way into Caesar's
house dressed as a woman. Unfortunately for him, his disguise was
detected. The insulted Vestals and the other ladies who were present flew
upon him like the dogs of Actaeon, tore his borrowed garments from him,
and drove him into the street naked and wounded. The adventure became
known. It was mentioned in the Senate, and the College of Priests was
ordered to hold an inquiry. The college found that Clodius had committed
sacrilege, and the regular course in such cases was to send the offender
to trial. There was general unwillingness, however, to treat this matter
seriously. Clodius had many friends in the house, and even Cicero, who was
inclined at first to be severe, took on reflection a more lenient view.
Clodius had a sister, a light lady who, weary of her conquests over her
fashionable admirers, had tried her fascinations on the great orator. He
had escaped complete subjugation, but he had been flattered by the
attention of the seductive beauty, and was ready to help her brother out
of his difficulty. Clodius was not yet the dangerous desperado which he
afterward became; and immorality, though seasoned with impiety, might
easily, it was thought, be made too much of. Caesar himself did not press
for punishment. As president of the college, he had acquiesced in their
decision, and he divorced the unfortunate Pompeia; but he expressed no
opinion as to the extent of her criminality, and he gave as his reason for
separating from her, not that she was guilty, but that Caesar's wife must
be above suspicion.

Cato, however, insisted on a prosecution. Messala, one of the consuls, was
equally peremptory. The hesitation was regarded by the stricter senators
as a scandal to the order; and in spite of the efforts of the second
consul Piso, who was a friend of Clodius, it was decided that a bill for
his indictment should be submitted to the assembly in the Forum. Clodius,
it seems, was generally popular. No political question was raised by the
proceedings against him; for the present his offence was merely a personal
one; the wreck of Catiline's companions, the dissolute young aristocrats,
the loose members of all ranks and classes, took up the cause, and
gathered to support their favorite, with young Curio, whom Cicero called
in mockery _Filiola_, at their head. The approaches to the Forum were
occupied by them. Piso, by whom the bill was introduced, himself advised
the people to reject it. Cato flew to the Rostra and railed at the consul.
Hortensius, the orator, and many others spoke on the same side. It
appeared at last that the people were divided, and would consent to the
bill being passed, if it was recommended to them by both the consuls.
Again, therefore, the matter was referred to the Senate. One of the
tribunes introduced Clodius, that he might speak for himself. Cicero had
now altered his mind, and was in favor of the prosecution.

[Sidenote: February, B.C. 61.]
The "pretty youth" was alternately humble and violent, begging pardon, and
then bursting into abuse of his brother-in-law, Lucullus, and more
particularly of Cicero, whom he suspected of being the chief promoter of
the proceedings against him. When it came to a division, the Senate voted
by a majority of four hundred to fifteen that the consuls must recommend
the bill. Piso gave way, and the tribune also who had been in Clodius's
favor. The people were satisfied, and a court of fifty-six judges was
appointed, before whom the trial was to take place. It seemed that a
conviction must necessarily follow, for there was no question about the
facts, which were all admitted. There was some manoeuvring, however, in
the constitution of the court, which raised Cicero's suspicions. The
judges, instead of being selected by the praetor, were chosen by lot, and
the prisoner was allowed to challenge as many names as he pleased. The
result was that in Cicero's opinion a more scandalous set of persons than
those who were finally sworn were never collected round a gaming table--
"disgraced senators, bankrupt knights, disreputable tribunes of the
treasury, the few honest men that were left appearing to be ashamed of
their company"--and Cicero considered that it would have been better if
Hortensius, who was prosecuting, had withdrawn, and had left Clodius to be
condemned by the general sense of respectable people, rather than risk the
credit of Roman justice before so scandalous a tribunal.[1] Still the
case as it proceeded appeared so clear as to leave no hope of an
acquittal. Clodius's friends were in despair, and were meditating an
appeal to the mob. The judges, on the evening of the first day of the
trial, as if they had already decided on a verdict of guilty, applied for
a guard to protect them while they delivered it. The Senate complimented
them in giving their consent. With a firm expectation present in all men's
minds the second morning dawned. Even in Rome, accustomed as it was to
mockeries of justice, public opinion was shocked when the confident
anticipation was disappointed. According to Cicero, Marcus Crassus, for
reasons known to himself, had been interested in Clodius. During the night
he sent for the judges one by one. He gave them money. What else he either
gave or promised them, must continue veiled in Cicero's Latin.[2] Before
these influences the resolution of the judges melted away, and when the
time came, thirty-one out of fifty-six high-born Roman peers and gentlemen
declared Clodius innocent.

The original cause was nothing. That a profligate young man should escape
punishment for a licentious frolic was comparatively of no consequence;
but the trial acquired a notoriety of infamy which shook once more the
already tottering constitution.

"Why did you ask for a guard?" old Catulus growled to the judges: "was it
that the money you have received might not be taken from you?"

"Such is the history of this affair," Cicero wrote to his friend Atticus.
"We thought that the foundation of the Commonwealth had been surely re-
established in my consulship, all orders of good men being happily united.
You gave the praise to me and I to the gods; and now unless some god looks
favorably on us, all is lost in this single judgment. Thirty Romans have
been found to trample justice under foot for a bribe, and to declare an
act not to have been committed, about which not only not a man, but not a
beast of the field, can entertain the smallest doubt."

Cato threatened the judges with impeachment; Cicero stormed in the Senate,
rebuked the consul Piso, and lectured Clodius in a speech which he himself
admired exceedingly. The "pretty boy" in reply taunted Cicero with wishing
to make himself a king. Cicero rejoined with asking Clodius about a man
named "King," whose estates he had appropriated, and reminded him of a
misadventure among the pirates, from which he had come off with nameless
ignominy. Neither antagonist very honorably distinguished himself in this
encounter of wit. The Senate voted at last for an inquiry into the judges'
conduct; but an inquiry only added to Cicero's vexation, for his special
triumph had been, as he conceived, the union of the Senate with the
equites; and the equites took the resolution as directed against
themselves, and refused to be consoled.[3]

Caesar had been absent during these scenes. His term of office having
expired, he had been despatched as propraetor to Spain, where the ashes of
the Sertorian rebellion were still smouldering; and he had started for his
province while the question of Clodius's trial was still pending. Portugal
and Gallicia were still unsubdued. Bands of robbers lay everywhere in the
fastnesses of the mountain ranges. Caesar was already favorably known in
Spain for his service as quaestor. He now completed the conquest of the
peninsula. He put down the banditti. He reorganized the administration
with the rapid skill which always so remarkably distinguished him. He sent
home large sums of money to the treasury. His work was done quickly, but
it was done completely. He nowhere left an unsound spot unprobed. He never
contented himself with the superficial healing of a wound which would
break out again when he was gone. What he began he finished, and left it
in need of no further surgery. As his reward, he looked for a triumph, and
the consulship, one or both; and the consulship he knew could not well be
refused to him, unwelcome as it would be to the Senate.

Pompey meanwhile was at last coming back. All lesser luminaries shone
faint before the sun of Pompey, the subduer of the pirates, the conqueror
of Asia, the glory of the Roman name. Even Cicero had feared that the fame
of the saviour of his country might pale before the lustre of the great
Pompey. "I used to be in alarm," he confessed with naive simplicity, "that
six hundred years hence the merits of Sampsiceramus[4] might seem to
have been more than mine." [5] But how would Pompey appear? Would he come
at the head of his army, like Sylla, the armed soldier of the democracy,
to avenge the affront upon his officers, to reform the State, to punish
the Senate for the murder of the Catiline conspirators? Pompey had no such
views, and no capacity for such ambitious operations. The ground had been
prepared beforehand. The Mucia story had perhaps done its work, and the
Senate and the great commander were willing to meet each other, at least
with outward friendliness.

His successes had been brilliant; but they were due rather to his honesty
than to his military genius. He had encountered no real resistance, and
Cato had sneered at his exploits as victories over women. He had put down
the buccaneers, because he had refused to be bribed by them. He had
overthrown Mithridates and had annexed Asia Minor and Syria to the Roman
dominions. Lucullus could have done it as easily as his successor, if he
could have turned his back upon temptations to increase his own fortune or
gratify his own passions. The wealth of the East had lain at Pompey's
feet, and he had not touched it. He had brought millions into the
treasury. He returned, as he had gone out, himself moderately provided
for, and had added nothing to his private income. He understood, and
practised strictly, the common rules of morality. He detested dishonesty
and injustice. But he had no political insight; and if he was ambitious,
it was with the innocent vanity which desires, and is content with,
admiration. In the time of the Scipios he would have lived in an
atmosphere of universal applause, and would have died in honor with an
unblemished name. In the age of Clodius and Catiline he was the easy dupe
of men of stronger intellect than his own, who played upon his
unsuspicious integrity. His delay in coming back had arisen chiefly from
anxiety for his personal safety. He was eager to be reconciled to the
Senate, yet without deserting the people. While in Asia, he had reassured
Cicero that nothing was to be feared from him.[6] His hope was to find
friends on all sides and in all parties, and he thought that he had
deserved their friendship.

[Sidenote: December, B.C. 62.]
Thus when Pompey landed at Brindisi his dreaded legions were disbanded,
and he proceeded to the Capitol, with a train of captive princes, as the
symbols of his victories, and wagons loaded with treasure as an offering
to his country. He was received as he advanced with the shouts of
applauding multitudes. He entered Rome in a galaxy of glory. A splendid
column commemorated the cities which he had taken, the twelve million
human beings whom he had slain or subjected. His triumph was the most
magnificent which the Roman citizens had ever witnessed, and by special
vote he was permitted to wear his triumphal robe in the Senate as often
and as long as might please him. The fireworks over, and with the aureole
of glory about his brow, the great Pompey, like another Samson shorn of
his locks, dropped into impotence and insignificance. In February, 61,
during the debate on the Clodius affair, he made his first speech in the
Senate. Cicero, listening with malicious satisfaction, reported that
"Pompey gave no pleasure to the wretched; to the bad he seemed without
backbone; he was not agreeable to the well-to-do; the wise and good found
him wanting in substance;" [7] in short, the speech was a failure. Pompey
applied for a second consulship. He was reminded that he had been consul
eight years previously, and that the ten years' interval prescribed by
Sylla, between the first and the second term, had not expired. He asked
for lands for his soldiers, and for the ratification of his acts in Asia.
Cato opposed the first request, as likely to lead to another agrarian law.
Lucullus, who was jealous of him, raised difficulties about the second,
and thwarted him with continual delays.

[Sidenote: February 1, B.C. 60.]
Pompey, being a poor speaker, thus found himself entirely helpless in the
new field. Cicero, being relieved of fear from him as a rival, was wise
enough to see that the collapse might not continue, and that his real
qualities might again bring him to the front. The Clodius business had
been a frightful scandal, and, smooth as the surface might seem, ugly
cracks were opening all round the constitution. The disbanded legions were
impatient for their farms. The knights, who were already offended with the
Senate for having thrown the disgrace of the Clodius trial upon them, had
a fresh and more substantial grievance. The leaders of the order had
contracted to farm the revenues in Asia. They found that the terms which
they had offered were too high, and they claimed an abatement, which the
Senate refused to allow. The Catiline conspiracy should have taught the
necessity of a vigorous administration. Caecilius Metellus and Lucius
Afranius, who had been chosen consuls for the year 60, were mere nothings.
Metellus was a vacant aristocrat,[8] to be depended on for resisting
popular demands, but without insight otherwise; the second, Afranius, was
a person "on whom only a philosopher could look without a groan;" [9] and
one year more might witness the consulship of Caesar. "I have not a
friend," Cicero wrote, "to whom I can express my real thoughts. Things
cannot long stand as they are. I have been vehement: I have put out all my
strength in the hope of mending matters and healing our disorders, but we
will not endure the necessary medicine. The seat of justice has been
publicly debauched. Resolutions are introduced against corruption, but no
law can be carried. The knights are alienated. The Senate has lost its
authority. The concord of the orders is gone, and the pillars of the
Commonwealth which I set up are overthrown. We have not a statesman, or
the shadow of one. My friend Pompey, who might have done something, sits
silent, admiring his fine clothes.[10] Crassus will say nothing to make
himself unpopular, and the rest are such idiots as to hope that although
the constitution fall they will save their own fish-ponds.[11] Cato, the
best man that we have, is more honest than wise. For these three months he
has been worrying the revenue farmers, and will not let the Senate satisfy
them." [12]

It was time for Cicero to look about him. The Catiline affair was not
forgotten. He might still be called to answer for the executions, and he
felt that he required some stronger support than an aristocracy, who would
learn nothing and seemed to be bent on destroying themselves. In letter
after letter he pours out his contempt for his friends "of the fish-
ponds," as he called them, who would neither mend their ways nor let
others mend them. He would not desert them altogether, but he provided for
contingencies. The tribunes had taken up the cause of Pompey's
legionaries. Agrarian laws were threatened, and Pompey himself was most
eager to see his soldiers satisfied. Cicero, who had hitherto opposed an
agrarian law with all his violence, discovered now that something might be
said in favor of draining "the sink of the city" [13] and repeopling
Italy. Besides the public advantage, he felt that he would please the
mortified but still popular Pompey; and he lent his help in the Senate to
improving a bill introduced by the tribunes, and endeavoring, though
unsuccessfully, to push it through.

[Sidenote: July, B.C. 60.]
So grateful was Pompey for Cicero's support that he called him, in the
Senate, "the saviour of the world." [14]Cicero was delighted with the
phrase, and began to look to Pompey as a convenient ally. He thought that
he could control and guide him and use his popularity for moderate
measures. Nay, even in his despair of the aristocracy, he began to regard
as not impossible a coalition with Caesar. "You caution me about Pompey,"
he wrote to Atticus in the following July. "Do not suppose that I am
attaching myself to him for my own protection; but the state of things is
such, that if we two disagree the worst misfortunes may be feared. I make
no concessions to him, I seek to make him better, and to cure him of his
popular levity; and now he speaks more highly by far of my actions than of
his own. He has merely done well, he says, while I have saved the State.
However this may affect me, it is certainly good for the Commonwealth.
What if I can make Caesar better also, who is now coming on with wind and
tide? Will that be so bad a thing? Even if I had no enemies, if I was
supported as universally as I ought to be, still a medicine which will
cure the diseased parts of the State is better than the surgery which
would amputate them. The knights have fallen off from the Senate. The
noble lords think they are in heaven when they have barbel in their ponds
that will eat out of their hands, and they leave the rest to fate. You
cannot love Cato more than I love him, but he does harm with the best
intentions. He speaks as if he was in Plato's Republic, instead of being
in the dregs of that of Romulus. Most true that corrupt judges ought to be
punished! Cato proposed it, the Senate agreed; but the knights have
declared war upon the Senate. Most insolent of the revenue farmers to
throw up their contract! Cato resisted them, and carried his point; but
now when seditions break out, the knights will not lift a finger to
repress them. Are we to hire mercenaries? Are we to depend on our slaves
and freedmen?.... But enough."[15]

[Sidenote: October, B.C. 60.]
[Sidenote: November, B.C. 60.]
Cicero might well despair of a Senate who had taken Cato to lead them.
Pompey had come home in the best of dispositions. The Senate had offended
Pompey, and, more than that, had offended his legionaries. They had
quarrelled with the knights. They had quarrelled with the moneyed
interests. They now added an entirely gratuitous affront to Caesar. His
Spanish administration was admitted by every one to have been admirable.
He was coming to stand for the consulship, which could not be refused; but
he asked for a triumph also, and as the rule stood there was a difficulty,
for if he was to have a triumph, he must remain outside the walls till the
day fixed for it, and if he was a candidate for office, he must be present
in person on the day of the election. The custom, though convenient
in itself, had been more than once set aside. Caesar applied to the Senate
for a dispensation, which would enable him to be a candidate in his
absence; and Cato, either from mere dislike of Caesar or from a hope that
he might prefer vanity to ambition, and that the dreaded consulship might
be escaped, persuaded the Senate to refuse. If this was the expectation,
it was disappointed. Caesar dropped his triumph, came home, and went
through the usual forms, and it at once appeared that his election was
certain, and that every powerful influence in the State was combined in
his favor. From Pompey he met the warmest reception. The Mucia bubble had
burst. Pompey saw in Caesar only the friend who had stood by him in every
step of his later career, and had braved the fury of the Senate at the
side of his officer Metellus Nepos. Equally certain it was that Caesar, as
a soldier, would interest himself for Pompey's legionaries, and that they
could be mutually useful to each other. Caesar had the people at his back,
and Pompey had the army. The third great power in Rome was that of the
capitalists, and about the attitude of these there was at first some
uncertainty. Crassus, who was the impersonation of them, was a friend of
Caesar, but had been on bad terms with Pompey. Caesar, however, contrived
to reconcile them; and thus all parties outside the patrician circle were
combined for a common purpose. Could Cicero have taken his place frankly
at their side, as his better knowledge told him to do, the inevitable
revolution might have been accomplished without bloodshed, and the course
of history have been different. Caesar wished it. But it was not so to be.
Cicero perhaps found that he would have to be content with a humbler
position than he had anticipated, that in such a combination he would have
to follow rather than to lead. He was tempted. He saw a promise of peace,
safety, influence, if not absolute, yet considerable. But he could not
bring himself to sacrifice the proud position which he had won for himself
in his consulship, as leader of the Conservatives; and he still hoped to
reign in the Senate, while using the protection of the popular chiefs as a
shelter in time of storms. Caesar was chosen consul without opposition.
His party was so powerful that it seemed at one time as if he could name
his colleague, but the Senate succeeded with desperate efforts in securing
the second place. They subscribed money profusely, the immaculate Cato
prominent among them. The machinery of corruption was well in order. The
great nobles commanded the votes of their _clientele_, and they
succeeded in giving Caesar the same companion who had accompanied him
through the aedileship and the praetorship, Marcus Bibulus, a dull,
obstinate fool, who could be relied on, if for nothing else, yet for
dogged resistance to every step which the Senate disapproved. For the
moment they appeared to have thought that with Bibulus's help they might
defy Caesar and reduce his office to a nullity. Immediately on the
election of the consuls, it was usual to determine the provinces to which
they were to be appointed when their consulate should expire. The
regulation lay with the Senate, and, either in mere spleen or to prevent
Caesar from having the command of an army, they allotted him the
department of the "Woods and Forests." [16] A very few weeks had
to pass before they discovered that they had to do with a man who was not
to be turned aside so slightingly.

Hitherto Caesar had been feared and hated, but his powers were rather
suspected than understood. As the nephew of Marius and the son-in-law of
Cinna, he was the natural chief of the party which had once governed Rome
and had been trampled under the hoof of Sylla. He had shown on many
occasions that he had inherited his uncle's principles, and could be
daring and skilful in asserting them. But he had held carefully within the
constitutional lines; he had kept himself clear of conspiracies; he had
never, like the Gracchi, put himself forward as a tribune or attempted the
part of a popular agitator. When he had exerted himself in the political
world of Rome, it had been to maintain the law against violence, to resist
and punish encroachments of arbitrary power, or to rescue the Empire from
being gambled away by incapable or profligate aristocrats. Thus he had
gathered for himself the animosity of the fashionable upper classes and
the confidence of the body of the people. But what he would do in power,
or what it was in him to do, was as yet merely conjectural.

[Sidenote: B.C. 50.]
At all events, after an interval of a generation there was again a popular
consul, and on every side there was a harvest of iniquities ready for the
sickle. Sixty years had passed since the death of the younger Gracchus;
revolution after revolution had swept over the Commonwealth, and Italy was
still as Tiberius Gracchus had found it. The Gracchan colonists had
disappeared. The Syllan military proprietors had disappeared--one by one
they had fallen to beggary, and had sold their holdings, and again the
country was parcelled into enormous estates cultivated by slave-gangs. The
Italians had been emancipated, but the process had gone no further. The
libertini, the sons of the freedmen, still waited for equality of rights.
The rich and prosperous provinces beyond the Po remained unenfranchised,
while the value of the franchise itself was daily diminishing as the
Senate resumed its control over the initiative of legislation. Each year
the elections became more corrupt. The Clodius judgment had been the most
frightful instance which had yet occurred of the depravity of the law
courts; while, by Cicero's own admission, not a single measure could pass
beyond discussion into act which threatened the interests of the
oligarchy. The consulship of Caesar was looked to with hope from the
respectable part of the citizens, with alarm from the high-born
delinquents as a period of genuine reform. The new consuls were to enter
office on the 1st of January. In December it was known that an agrarian
law would be at once proposed under plea of providing for Pompey's troops;
and Cicero had to decide whether he would act in earnest in the spirit
which he had begun to show when the tribunes' bill was under discussion,
or would fall back upon resistance with the rest of his party, or evade
the difficult dilemma by going on foreign service, or else would simply
absent himself from Rome while the struggle was going on. "I may either
resist," he said, "and there will be an honorable fight; or I may do
nothing, and withdraw into the country, which will be honorable also; or I
may give active help, which I am told Caesar expects of me. His friend,
Cornelius Balbus, who was with me lately, affirms that Caesar will be
guided in everything by my advice and Pompey's, and will use his endeavor
to bring Pompey and Crassus together. Such a course has its advantages; it
will draw me closely to Pompey and, if I please, to Caesar. I shall have
no more to fear from my enemies. I shall be at peace with the people. I
can look to quiet in my old age. But the lines still move me which
conclude the third book (of my Poem on my consulship): 'Hold to the track
on which thou enteredst in thy early youth, which thou pursuedst as consul
so valorously and bravely. Increase thy fame, and seek the praise of the
good.'" [17]

It had been proposed to send Cicero on a mission to Egypt. "I should like
well, and I have long wished," he said, "to see Alexandria and the rest of
that country. They have had enough of me here at present, and they may
wish for me when I am away. But to go now, and to go on a commission from
Caesar and Pompey!

                                I should blush
  To face the men and long-robed dames of Troy.[18]

What will our optimates say, if we have any optimates left? Polydamas will
throw in my teeth that I have been bribed by the opposition--I mean Cato,
who is one out of a hundred thousand to me. What will history say of me
six hundred years hence? I am more afraid of that than of the chatter of
my contemporaries."[19]

So Cicero meditated, thinking as usual of himself first and of his duty
afterward--the fatalest of all courses then and always.


[1] "Si causam quaeris absolutionis, egestas judicum fuit et turpitudo....
    Non vidit (Hortensius) satius esse illum in infamia relinqui ac
    sordibus quam infirmo judicio committi."--_To Atticus_, i. 16.

[2] "Jam vero, oh Dii Boni! rem perditam! etiam noctes certarum mulierum,
    atque _adolescentulorum nobilium_ introductiones nonnullis
    judicibus pro mercedis cumulo fuerunt."--_Ad Atticum_, i. 16.

[3] "Nos hic in republica infirma, misera commutabilique versamur. Credo
    enim te audisse, nostros equites paene a senatu esse disjunctos; qui
    primum illud valde graviter tulerund, promulgatum ex senatus consulto
    fuisse, ut de iis, qui ob judicaudum pecuniam accepissent queareretur.
    Qua in re decernenda cum ego casu non affuissem, sensissemque id
    equestrem ordinem ferre moleste, neque aperte dicere: objurgavi
    senatum, ut mihi visus sum, summa cum auctoritate, et in causa non
    verecunda admodum gravis et copiosus fui."--_To Atticus_, i. 17.

[4] A nickname under which Cicero often speaks of Pompey.

[5] "Solebat enim me pungere, ne Sampsicerami merita in patriam ad annos
    DC majora viderentur, quam nostra."--_To Atticus_, ii. 17.

[6] "Pompeius nobis amicissimus esse constat."--_To Atticus_, i. 13.

[7] "Non jucunda miseris, inanis improbis, beatis non grata, bonis non
    gravis. Itaque frigebat."--_To Atticus_, i. 14.

[8] "Metellus non homo, sed litus atque aer, et solitudo mera."--_To
    Atticus_, i. 18.

[9] "Consul est impositus is nobis, quem nemo, praeter nos philosophos,
    aspicere sine suspiratu potest."--_Ib_. i. 18.

[10] "Pompeius togulam illam pictam silentio tuetur suam."--_Ib_.
    The "picta togula" means the triumphal robe which Pompey was allowed
    to wear.

[11] "Ceteros jam nosti; qui ita sunt stulti, ut amissa republica piscinas
    suas fore salvas sperare videantur."--_Ib_.

[12] _Ib_., abridged.

[13] "Sentinam urbis," a worse word than he had blamed in Rullus three
    years before.--_To Atticus_, i. 19.

[14] "Pompeium adduxi in eam voluntatem, ut in Senatu non semel, sed
    saepe, multisque verbis, hujus mihi salutem imperii atque orbis
    terrarum adjudicarit."--_ib_.

[15] _To Atticus_, ii. 1, abridged.

[16] _Silvae Callesque_--to which "woods and forests" is a near
    equivalent.

[17] "Interea cursus, quos prima a parte juventae,
    Quosque ideo consul virtute animoque petisti,
    Hos retine atquae auge famam laudesque bonorum."
    _To Atticus_, ii. 3.

[18] Iliad, vi. 442. Lord Derby's translation.

[19] _To Atticus_, ii. 5.




CHAPTER XIII.


The consulship of Caesar was the last chance for the Roman aristocracy. He
was not a revolutionist. Revolutions are the last desperate remedy when
all else has failed. They may create as many evils as they cure, and wise
men always hate them. But if revolution was to be escaped, reform was
inevitable, and it was for the Senate to choose between the alternatives.
Could the noble lords have known then, in that their day, the things that
belonged to their peace--could they have forgotten their fish-ponds and
their game-preserves, and have remembered that, as the rulers of the
civilized world, they had duties which the eternal order of nature would
exact at their hands--the shaken constitution might again have regained
its stability, and the forms and even the reality of the Republic might
have continued for another century. It was not to be. Had the Senate been
capable of using the opportunity, they would long before have undertaken a
reformation for themselves. Even had their eyes been opened, there were
disintegrating forces at work which the highest political wisdom could do
no more than arrest; and little good is really effected by prolonging
artificially the lives of either constitutions or individuals beyond their
natural period. From the time when Rome became an empire, mistress of
provinces to which she was unable to extend her own liberties, the days of
her self-government were numbered. A homogeneous and vigorous people may
manage their own affairs under a popular constitution so long as their
personal characters remain undegenerate. Parliaments and Senates may
represent the general will of the community, and may pass laws and
administer them as public sentiment approves. But such bodies can preside
successfully only among subjects who are directly represented in them.
They are too ignorant, too selfish, too divided, to govern others; and
imperial aspirations draw after them, by obvious necessity, an imperial
rule. Caesar may have known this in his heart, yet the most far-seeing
statesman will not so trust his own misgivings as to refuse to hope for
the regeneration of the institutions into which he is born. He will
determine that justice shall be done. Justice is the essence of
government, and without justice all forms, democratic or monarchic, are
tyrannies alike. But he will work with the existing methods till the
inadequacy of them has been proved beyond dispute. Constitutions are never
overthrown till they have pronounced sentence on themselves.

Caesar accordingly commenced office by an endeavor to conciliate. The army
and the moneyed interests, represented by Pompey and Crassus, were already
with him; and he used his endeavors, as has been seen, to gain Cicero, who
might bring with him such part of the landed aristocracy as were not
hopelessly incorrigible. With Cicero he but partially succeeded. The great
orator solved the problem of the situation by going away into the country
and remaining there for the greater part of the year, and Caesar had to do
without an assistance which, in the speaking department, would have been
invaluable to him. His first step was to order the publication of the
"Acta Diurna," a daily journal of the doings of the Senate. The light of
day being thrown in upon that august body might prevent honorable members
from laying hands on each other as they had lately done, and might enable
the people to know what was going on among them--on a better authority
than rumor. He then introduced his agrarian law, the rough draft of which
had been already discussed, and had been supported by Cicero in the
preceding year. Had he meant to be defiant, like the Gracchi, he might
have offered it at once to the people. Instead of doing so, he laid it
before the Senate, inviting them to amend his suggestions, and promising
any reasonable concessions if they would co-operate. No wrong was to be
done to any existing occupiers. No right of property was to be violated
which was any real right at all. Large tracts in Campania which belonged
to the State were now held on the usual easy terms by great landed
patricians. These Caesar proposed to buy out, and to settle on the ground
twenty thousand of Pompey's veterans. There was money enough and to spare
in the treasury, which they had themselves brought home. Out of the large
funds which would still remain land might be purchased in other parts of
Italy for the rest, and for a few thousand of the unemployed population
which was crowded into Rome. The measure in itself was admitted to be a
moderate one. Every pains had been taken to spare the interests and to
avoid hurting the susceptibilities of the aristocrats. But, as Cicero
said, the very name of an agrarian law was intolerable to them. It meant
in the end spoliation and division of property, and the first step would
bring others after it. The public lands they had shared conveniently among
themselves from immemorial time. The public treasure was their treasure,
to be laid out as they might think proper. Cato headed the opposition. He
stormed for an entire day, and was so violent that Caesar threatened him
with arrest. The Senate groaned and foamed; no progress was made or was
likely to be made; and Caesar, as much in earnest as they were, had to
tell them that if they would not help him he must appeal to the assembly.
"I invited you to revise the law," he said; "I was willing that if any
clause displeased you it should be expunged. You will not touch it. Well,
then, the people must decide."

The Senate had made up their minds to fight the battle. If Caesar went to
the assembly, Bibulus, their second consul, might stop the proceedings. If
this seemed too extreme a step, custom provided other impediments to which
recourse might be had. Bibulus might survey the heavens, watch the birds,
or the clouds, or the direction of the wind, and declare the aspects
unfavorable; or he might proclaim day after day to be holy, and on holy
days no legislation was permitted. Should these religious cobwebs be
brushed away, the Senate had provided a further resource in three of the
tribunes whom they had bribed. Thus they held themselves secure, and dared
Caesar to do his worst. Caesar on his side was equally determined. The
assembly was convoked. The Forum was choked to overflowing. Caesar and
Pompey stood on the steps of the Temple of Castor, and Bibulus and his
tribunes were at hand ready with their interpellations. Such passions had
not been roused in Rome since the days of Cinna and Octavius, and many a
young lord was doubtless hoping that the day would not close without
another lesson to ambitious demagogues and howling mobs. In their eyes the
one reform which Rome needed was another Sylla.

Caesar read his law from the tablet on which it was inscribed; and, still
courteous to his antagonist, he turned to Bibulus and asked him if he had
any fault to find. Bibulus said sullenly that he wanted no revolutions,
and that while he was consul there should be none. The people hissed; and
he then added in a rage, "You shall not have your law this year though
every man of you demand it." Caesar answered nothing, but Pompey and
Crassus stood forward. They were not officials, but they were real forces.
Pompey was the idol of every soldier in the State, and at Caesar's
invitation he addressed the assembly. He spoke for his veterans. He spoke
for the poor citizens. He said that he approved the law to the last letter
of it.

"Will you then," asked Caesar, "support the law if it be illegally
opposed?" "Since," replied Pompey, "you consul, and you my fellow-
citizens, ask aid of me, a poor individual without office and without
authority, who nevertheless has done some service to the State, I say that
I will bear the shield if others draw the sword." Applause rang out from a
hundred thousand throats. Crassus followed to the same purpose, and was
received with the same wild delight. A few senators, who retained their
senses, saw the uselessness of the opposition, and retired. Bibulus was of
duller and tougher metal. As the vote was about to be taken, he and his
tribunes rushed to the rostra. The tribunes pronounced their veto. Bibulus
said that he had consulted the sky; the gods forbade further action being
taken that day, and he declared the assembly dissolved. Nay, as if a man
like Caesar could be stopped by a shadow, he proposed to sanctify the
whole remainder of the year, that no further business might be transacted
in it. Yells drowned his voice. The mob rushed upon the steps; Bibulus was
thrown down, and the rods of the lictors were broken; the tribunes who had
betrayed their order were beaten. Cato held his ground, and stormed at
Caesar till he was led off by the police, raving and gesticulating. The
law was then passed, and a resolution besides that every senator should
take an oath to obey it.

So in ignominy the Senate's resistance collapsed: the Caesar whom they had
thought to put off with their "woods and forests" had proved stronger than
the whole of them; and, prostrate at the first round of the battle, they
did not attempt another. They met the following morning. Bibulus told his
story and appealed for support. Had the Senate complied, they would
probably have ceased to exist. The oath was unpalatable, but they made the
best of it. Metellus Celer, Cato, and Favonius, a senator whom men called
Cato's ape, struggled against their fate, but, "swearing they would ne'er
consent, consented." The unwelcome formula was swallowed by the whole of
them; and Bibulus, who had done his part and had been beaten and kicked
and trampled upon, and now found his employers afraid to stand by him,
went off sulkily to his house, shut himself up there, and refused to act
as consul further during the remainder of the year.

There was no further active opposition. A commission was appointed by
Caesar to carry out the land act, composed of twenty of the best men that
could be found, one of them being Atius Balbus, the husband of Caesar's
only sister, and grandfather of a little child now three years old, who
was known afterward to the world as Augustus. Cicero was offered a place,
but declined. The land question having been disposed of, Caesar then
proceeded with the remaining measures by which his consulship was
immortalized. He had redeemed his promise to Pompey by providing for his
soldiers. He gratified Crassus by giving the desired relief to the farmers
of the taxes. He confirmed Pompey's arrangements for the government of
Asia, which the Senate had left in suspense. The Senate was now itself
suspended. The consul acted directly with the assembly, without
obstruction and without remonstrance, Bibulus only from time to time
sending out monotonous admonitions from within doors that the season was
consecrated, and that Caesar's acts had no validity. Still more
remarkably, and as the distinguishing feature of his term of office,
Caesar carried, with the help of the people, the body of admirable laws
which are known to jurists as the "Leges Juliae," and mark an epoch in
Roman history. They were laws as unwelcome to the aristocracy as they were
essential to the continued existence of the Roman State, laws which had
been talked of in the Senate, but which could never pass through the
preliminary stage of resolutions, and were now enacted over the Senate's
head by the will of Caesar and the sovereign power of the nation. A mere
outline can alone be attempted here. There was a law declaring the
inviolability of the persons of magistrates during their term of
authority, reflecting back on the murder of Saturninus, and touching by
implication the killing of Lentulus and his companions. There was a law
for the punishment of adultery, most disinterestedly singular if the
popular accounts of Caesar's habits had any grain of truth in them. There
were laws for the protection of the subject from violence, public or
private; and laws disabling persons who had laid hands illegally on Roman
citizens from holding office in the Commonwealth. There was a law,
intended at last to be effective, to deal with judges who allowed
themselves to be bribed. There were laws against defrauders of the
revenue; laws against debasing the coin; laws against sacrilege; laws
against corrupt State contracts; laws against bribery at elections.
Finally, there was a law, carefully framed, _De repetundis_, to exact
retribution from proconsuls or propraetors of the type of Verres who had
plundered the provinces. All governors were required, on relinquishing
office, to make a double return of their accounts, one to remain for
inspection among the archives of the province, and one to be sent to Rome;
and where peculation or injustice could be proved, the offender's estate
was made answerable to the last sesterce.[1]

Such laws were words only without the will to execute them; but they
affirmed the principles on which Roman or any other society could alone
continue. It was for the officials of the constitution to adopt them, and
save themselves and the Republic, or to ignore them as they had ignored
the laws which already existed, and see it perish as it deserved. All that
man could do for the preservation of his country from revolution Caesar
had accomplished. Sylla had re-established the rule of the aristocracy,
and it had failed grossly and disgracefully. Cinna and Marius had tried
democracy, and that had failed. Caesar was trying what law would do, and
the result remained to be seen. Bibulus, as each measure was passed,
croaked that it was null and void. The leaders of the Senate threatened
between their teeth that all should be undone when Caesar's term was over.
Cato, when he mentioned the "Leges Juliae," spoke of them as enactments,
but refused them their author's name. But the excellence of these laws was
so clearly recognized that they survived the irregularity of their
introduction; and the "Lex de Repetundis" especially remained a terror to
evil-doers, with a promise of better days to the miserable and pillaged
subjects of the Roman Empire.

So the year of Caesar's consulship passed away. What was to happen when it
had expired? The Senate had provided "the woods and forests" for him. But
the Senate's provision in such a matter could not be expected to hold. He
asked for nothing, but he was known to desire an opportunity of
distinguished service. Caesar was now forty-three. His life was ebbing
away, and, with the exception of his two years in Spain, it had been spent
in struggling with the base elements of Roman faction. Great men will bear
such sordid work when it is laid on them, but they loathe it
notwithstanding, and for the present there was nothing more to be done. A
new point of departure had been taken. Principles had been laid down for
the Senate and people to act on, if they could and would. Caesar could
only wish for a long absence in some new sphere of usefulness, where he
could achieve something really great which his country would remember.

And on one side only was such a sphere open to him. The East was Roman to
the Euphrates. No second Mithridates could loosen the grasp with which the
legions now held the civilized parts of Asia. Parthians might disturb the
frontier, but could not seriously threaten the Eastern dominions; and no
advantage was promised by following on the steps of Alexander and annexing
countries too poor to bear the cost of their maintenance. To the west it
was different. Beyond the Alps there was still a territory of unknown
extent, stretching away to the undefined ocean, a territory peopled with
warlike races, some of whom in ages long past had swept over Italy and
taken Rome, and had left their descendants and their name in the northern
province, which was now called Cisalpine Gaul. With these races the Romans
had as yet no clear relations, and from them alone could any serious
danger threaten the State. The Gauls had for some centuries ceased their
wanderings, had settled down in fixed localities. They had built towns and
bridges; they had cultivated the soil, and had become wealthy and partly
civilized. With the tribes adjoining Provence the Romans had alliances
more or less precarious, and had established a kind of protectorate over
them. But even here the inhabitants were uneasy for their independence,
and troubles were continually arising with them; while into these
districts and into the rest of Gaul a fresh and stormy element was now
being introduced. In earlier times the Gauls had been stronger than the
Germans, and not only could they protect their own frontier, but they had
formed settlements beyond the Rhine. These relations were being changed.
The Gauls, as they grew in wealth, declined in vigor. The Germans, still
roving and migratory, were throwing covetous eyes out of their forests on
the fields and vineyards of their neighbors, and enormous numbers of them
were crossing the Rhine and Danube, looking for new homes. How feeble a
barrier either the Alps or the Gauls themselves might prove against such
invaders had been but too recently experienced. Men who were of middle age
at the time of Caesar's consulship could still remember the terrors which
had been caused by the invasion of the Cimbri and Teutons. Marius had
saved Italy then from destruction, as it were, by the hair of its head.
The annihilation of those hordes had given Rome a passing respite. But
fresh generations had grown up. Fresh multitudes were streaming out of
the North. Germans in hundreds of thousands were again passing the Upper
Rhine, rooting themselves in Burgundy, and coming in collision with tribes
which Rome protected. There were uneasy movements among the Gauls
themselves, whole nations of them breaking up from their homes and again
adrift upon the world. Gaul and Germany were like a volcano giving signs
of approaching eruption; and at any moment, and hardly with warning,
another lava-stream might be pouring down into Venetia and Lombardy.

To deal with this danger was the work marked out for Caesar. It is the
fashion to say that he sought a military command that he might have an
army behind him to overthrow the constitution. If this was his object,
ambition never chose a more dangerous or less promising route for itself.
Men of genius who accomplish great things in this world do not trouble
themselves with remote and visionary aims. They encounter emergencies as
they rise, and leave the future to shape itself as it may. It would seem
that at first the defence of Italy was all that was thought of. "The woods
and forests" were set aside, and Caesar, by a vote of the people, was
given the command of Cisalpine Gaul and Illyria for five years; but either
he himself desired, or especial circumstances which were taking place
beyond the mountains recommended, that a wider scope should be allowed
him. The Senate, finding that the people would act without them if they
hesitated, gave him in addition Gallia Comata, the land of the Gauls with
the long hair, the governorship of the Roman province beyond the Alps,
with untrammelled liberty to act as he might think good throughout the
country which is now known as France and Switzerland and the Rhine
provinces of Germany.

He was to start early in the approaching year. It was necessary before he
went to make some provision for the quiet government of the capital. The
alliance with Pompey and Crassus gave temporary security. Pompey had less
stability of character than could have been wished, but he became attached
to Caesar's daughter Julia; and a fresh link of marriage was formed to
hold them together. Caesar himself married Calpurnia, the daughter of
Calpurnius Piso. The Senate having temporarily abdicated, he was able to
guide the elections; and Piso and Pompey's friend Gabinius, who had
obtained the command of the pirate war for him, were chosen consuls for
the year 58. Neither of them, if we can believe a tithe of Cicero's
invective, was good for much; but they were stanch partisans, and were to
be relied on to resist any efforts which might be made to repeal the
"Leges Juliae." These matters being arranged, and his own term having
expired, Caesar withdrew, according to custom, to the suburbs beyond the
walls to collect troops and prepare for his departure. Strange things,
however, had yet to happen before he was gone.

[Sidenote: B. C. 58.]
It is easy to conceive how the Senate felt at these transactions, how ill
they bore to find themselves superseded and the State managed over their
heads. Fashionable society was equally furious, and the three allies went
by the name of Dynasts, or "Reges Superbi." After resistance had been
abandoned, Cicero came back to Rome to make cynical remarks from which all
parties suffered equally. His special grievance was the want of
consideration which he conceived to have been shown for himself. He mocked
at the Senate; he mocked at Bibulus, whom he particularly abominated; he
mocked at Pompey and the agrarian law. Mockery turned to indignation when
he thought of the ingratitude of the Senate, and his chief consolation in
their discomfiture was that it had fallen on them through the neglect of
their most distinguished member. "I could have saved them if they would
have let me," he said. "I could save them still if I were to try; but I
will go study philosophy in my own family." [2] "Freedom is gone," he
wrote to Atticus; "and if we are to be worse enslaved, we shall bear it.
Our lives and properties are more to us than liberty. We sigh, and we do
not even remonstrate." [3]

Cato, in the desperation of passion, called Pompey a dictator in the
assembly, and barely escaped being killed for his pains.[4] The
patricians revenged themselves in private by savage speeches and plots and
purposes. Fashionable society gathered in the theatres and hissed the
popular leaders. Lines were introduced into the plays reflecting on
Pompey, and were encored a thousand times. Bibulus from his closet
continued to issue venomous placards, reporting scandals about Caesar's
life, and now for the first time bringing up the story of Nicomedes. The
streets were impassable where these papers were pasted up, from the crowds
of loungers which were gathered to read them, and Bibulus for the moment
was the hero of patrician saloons. Some malicious comfort Cicero gathered
out of these manifestations of feeling. He had no belief in the noble
lords, and small expectations from them. Bibulus was, on the whole, a fit
representative for the gentry of the fish-ponds. But the Dynasts were at
least heartily detested in quarters which had once been powerful, and
might be powerful again; and he flattered himself, though he affected to
regret it, that the animosity against them was spreading. To all parties
there is attached a draggled trail of disreputables, who hold themselves
entitled to benefits when their side is in power, and are angry when they
are passed over.

"The State," Cicero wrote in the autumn of 59 to Atticus, "is in a worse
condition than when you left us; then we thought that we had fallen under
a power which pleased the people, and which, though abhorrent to the good,
yet was not totally destructive to them. Now all hate it equally, and we
are in terror as to where the exasperation may break out. We had
experienced the ill-temper and irritation of those who in their anger with
Cato had brought ruin on us; but the poison worked so slowly that it
seemed we might die without pain. I hoped, as I often told you, that the
wheel of the constitution was so turning that we should scarcely hear a
sound or see any visible track; and so it would have been could men have
waited for the tempest to pass over them. But the secret sighs turned to
groans, and the groans to universal clamor; and thus our friend Pompey,
who so lately swam in glory and never heard an evil word of himself, is
broken-hearted and knows not whither to turn. A precipice is before him,
and to retreat is dangerous. The good are against him; the bad are not his
friends. I could scarce help weeping the other day when I heard him
complaining in the Forum of the publication of Bibulus. He who but a short
time since bore himself so proudly there, with the people in raptures with
him, and with the world on his side, was now so humble and abject as to
disgust even himself, not to say his hearers. Crassus enjoyed the scene,
but no one else. Pompey had fallen down out of the stars--not by a gradual
descent, but in a single plunge; and as Apelles if he had seen his Venus,
or Protogenes his Ialysus, all daubed with mud, would have been vexed and
annoyed, so was I grieved to the very heart to see one whom I had painted
out in the choicest colors of art thus suddenly defaced.[5] Pompey is
sick with irritation at the placards of Bibulus. I am sorry about them.
They give such excessive annoyance to a man whom I have always liked; and
Pompey is so prompt with his sword, and so unaccustomed to insult, that I
fear what he may do. What the future may have in store for Bibulus I know
not. At present he is the admired of all." [6]

"Sampsiceramus," Cicero wrote a few days later, "is greatly penitent. He
would gladly be restored to the eminence from which he has fallen.
Sometimes he imparts his griefs to me, and asks me what he should do,
which I cannot tell him." [7]

Unfortunate Cicero, who knew what was right, but was too proud to do it!
Unfortunate Pompey, who still did what was right, but was too sensitive to
bear the reproach of it, who would so gladly not leave his duty
unperformed, and yet keep the "sweet voices" whose applause had grown so
delicious to him! Bibulus was in no danger. Pompey was too good-natured to
hurt him; and Caesar let fools say what they pleased, as long as they were
fools without teeth, who would bark but could not bite. The risk was to
Cicero himself, little as he seemed to be aware of it. Caesar was to be
long absent from Rome, and he knew that as soon as he was engaged in Gaul
the extreme oligarchic faction would make an effort to set aside his land
commission and undo his legislation. When he had a clear purpose in view,
and was satisfied that it was a good purpose, he was never scrupulous
about his instruments. It was said of him that when he wanted any work
done he chose the persons best able to do it, let their general character
be what it might. The rank and file of the patricians, proud, idle,
vicious, and self-indulgent, might be left to their mistresses and their
gaming-tables. They could do no mischief unless they had leaders at their
head who could use their resources more effectively than they could do
themselves. There were two men only in Rome with whose help they could be
really dangerous--Cato, because he was a fanatic, impregnable to argument,
and not to be influenced by temptation of advantage to himself; Cicero, on
account of his extreme ability, his personal ambition, and his total want
of political principle. Cato he knew to be impracticable. Cicero he had
tried to gain; but Cicero, who had played a first part as consul, could
not bring himself to play a second, and, if the chance offered, had both
power and will to be troublesome. Some means had to be found to get rid of
these two, or at least to tie their hands and to keep them in order. There
would be Pompey and Crassus still at hand. But Pompey was weak, and
Crassus understood nothing beyond the art of manipulating money. Gabinius
and Piso, the next consuls, had an indifferent reputation and narrow
abilities, and at best they would have but their one year of authority.
Politics, like love, makes strange bedfellows. In this difficulty accident
threw in Cesar's way a convenient but most unexpected ally.

Young Clodius, after his escape from prosecution by the marvellous methods
which Crassus had provided for him, was more popular than ever. He had
been the occasion of a scandal which had brought infamy on the detested
Senate. His offence in itself seemed slight in so loose an age, and was as
nothing compared with the enormity of his judges. He had come out of his
trial with a determination to be revenged on the persons from whose
tongues he had suffered most severely in the senatorial debates. Of these
Cato had been the most savage; but Cicero had been the most exasperating,
from his sarcasms, his airs of patronage, and perhaps his intimacy with
his sister. The noble youth had exhausted the common forms of pleasure. He
wanted a new excitement, and politics and vengeance might be combined. He
was as clever as he was dissolute, and, as clever men are fortunately rare
in the licentious part, of society, they are always idolized, because they
make vice respectable by connecting it with intellect. Clodius was a
second, an abler Catiline, equally unprincipled and far more dexterous and
prudent. In times of revolution there is always a disreputable wing to the
radical party, composed of men who are the natural enemies of established
authority, and these all rallied about their new leader with devout
enthusiasm. Clodius was not without political experience. His first public
appearance had been as leader of a mutiny. He was already quaestor, and so
a senator; but he was too young to aspire to the higher magistracies which
were open to him as a patrician. He declared his intention of renouncing
his order, becoming a plebeian, and standing for the tribuneship of the
people. There were precedents for such a step, but they were rare. The
abdicating noble had to be adopted into a plebeian family, and the consent
was required of the consuls and of the Pontifical College. With the
growth of political equality the aristocracy had become more insistent
upon the privilege of birth, which could not be taken from them; and for a
Claudius to descend among the canaille was as if a Howard were to seek
adoption from a shopkeeper in the Strand.

At first there was universal amazement. Cicero had used the intrigue with
Pompeia as a text for a sermon on the immoralities of the age. The
aspirations of Clodius to be a tribune he ridiculed as an illustration of
its follies, and after scourging him in the Senate, he laughed at him and
jested with him in private.[8] Cicero did not understand with how
venomous a snake he was playing. He even thought Clodius likely to turn
against the Dynasts, and to become a serviceable member of the
conservative party. Gradually he was forced to open his eyes. Speeches
were reported to him as coming from Clodius or his allies threatening an
inquiry into the death of the Catilinarians. At first he pushed his alarms
aside, as unworthy of him. What had so great a man as he to fear from a
young reprobate like "the pretty boy"? The "pretty boy," however, found
favor where it was least looked for. Pompey supported his adventure for
the tribuneship. Caesar, though it was Caesar's house which he had
violated, did not oppose. Bibulus refused consent, but Bibulus had
virtually abdicated and went for nothing. The legal forms were complied
with. Clodius found a commoner younger than himself who was willing to
adopt him, and who, the day after the ceremony, released him from the new
paternal authority. He was now a plebeian, and free. He remained a senator
in virtue of his quaestorship, and he was chosen tribune of the people for
the year 58.

Cicero was at last startled out of his security. So long as the consuls,
or one of them, could be depended on, a tribune's power was insignificant.
When the consuls were of his own way of thinking, a tribune was a very
important personage indeed. Atticus was alarmed for his friend, and
cautioned him to look to himself. Warnings came from all quarters that
mischief was in the wind. Still it was impossible to believe the peril to
be a real one. Cicero, to whom Rome owed its existence, to be struck at by
a Clodius! It could not be. As little could a wasp hurt an elephant.

There can be little doubt that Caesar knew what Clodius had in his mind;
or that, if the design was not his own, he had purposely allowed it to go
forward. Caesar did not wish to hurt Cicero. He wished well to him, and
admired him; but he did not mean to leave him free in Rome to lead a
senatorial reaction. A prosecution for the execution of the prisoners was
now distinctly announced. Cicero as consul had put to death Roman citizens
without a trial. Cicero was to be called to answer for the illegality
before the sovereign people. The danger was unmistakable; and Caesar, who
was still in the suburbs making his preparations, invited Cicero to avoid
it, by accompanying him as second in command into Gaul. The offer was made
in unquestionable sincerity. Caesar may himself have created the situation
to lay Cicero under a pressure, but he desired nothing so much as to take
him as his companion, and to attach him to himself. Cicero felt the
compliment and hesitated to refuse, but his pride again came in his way.
Pompey assured him that not a hair of his head should be touched. Why
Pompey gave him this encouragement Cicero could never afterwards
understand. The scenes in the theatres had also combined to mislead him,
and he misread the disposition of the great body of citizens. He imagined
that they would all start up in his defence, Senate, aristocracy, knights,
commoners, and tradesmen. The world, he thought, looked back upon his
consulship with as much admiration as he did himself, and was always
contrasting him with his successors. Never was mistake more profound. The
Senate, who had envied his talents and resented his assumption, now
despised him as a trimmer. His sarcasms had made him enemies among those
who acted with him politically. He had held aloof at the crisis of
Caesar's election and in the debates which followed, and therefore all
sides distrusted him; while throughout the body of the people there was,
as Caesar had foretold, a real and sustained resentment at the conduct of
the Catiline affair. The final opinion of Rome was that the prisoners
ought to have been tried; and that they were not tried was attributed not
unnaturally to a desire, on the part of the Senate, to silence an inquiry
which might have proved inconvenient.

Thus suddenly out of a clear sky the thunder-clouds gathered over Cicero's
head. "Clodius," says Dion Cassius, "had discovered that among the
senators Cicero was more feared than loved. There were few of them who had
not been hit by his irony, or irritated by his presumption." Those who
most agreed in what he had done were not ashamed to shuffle off upon him
their responsibilities. Clodius, now omnipotent with the assembly at his
back, cleared the way by a really useful step; he carried a law abolishing
the impious form of declaring the heavens unfavorable when an inconvenient
measure was to be stopped or delayed. Probably it formed a part of his
engagement with Caesar. The law may have been meant to act
retrospectively, to prevent a question being raised on the interpellations
of Bibulus. This done, and without paying the Senate the respect of first
consulting it, he gave notice that he would propose a vote to the
assembly, to the effect that any person who had put to death a Roman
citizen without trial, and without allowing him an appeal to the people,
had violated the constitution of the State. Cicero was not named directly;
every senator who had voted for the execution of Cethegus and Lentulus and
their companions was as guilty as he; but it was known immediately that
Cicero was the mark that was being aimed at; and Caesar at once renewed
the offer, which he made before, to take Cicero with him. Cicero, now
frightened in earnest, still could not bring himself to owe his escape to
Caesar. The Senate, ungrateful as they had been, put on mourning with an
affectation of dismay. The knights petitioned the consuls to interfere for
Cicero's protection. The consuls declined to receive their request. Caesar
outside the city gave no further sign. A meeting of the citizens was held
in the camp. Caesar's opinion was invited. He said that he had not changed
his sentiments. He had remonstrated at the time against the execution. He
disapproved of it still, but he did not directly advise legislation upon
acts that were past. Yet, though he did not encourage Clodius, he did not
interfere. He left the matter to the consuls, and one of them was his own
father-in-law, and the other was Gabinius, once Pompey's favorite officer.
Gabinius, Cicero thought, would respect Pompey's promise to him. To Piso
he made a personal appeal. He found him, he said afterwards,[9] at
eleven in the morning, in his slippers, at a low tavern. Piso came out,
reeking with wine, and excused himself by saying that his health required
a morning draught. Cicero attempted to receive his apology, and he stood
for a while at the tavern door, till he could no longer bear the smell and
the foul language and expectorations of the consul. Hope in that quarter
there was none. Two days later the assembly was called to consider
Clodius's proposal. Piso was asked to say what he thought of the treatment
of the conspirators; he answered gravely, and, as Cicero described him,
with one eye in his forehead, that he disapproved of cruelty. Neither
Pompey nor his friends came to help. What was Cicero to do? Resist by
force? The young knights rallied about him eager for a fight, if he would
but give the word. Sometimes as he looked back in after-years he blamed
himself for declining their services, sometimes he took credit to himself
for refusing to be the occasion of bloodshed.[10]

"I was too timid," he said once; "I had the country with me, and I should
have stood firm. I had to do with a band of villains only, with two
monsters of consuls, and with the male harlot of rich buffoons, the
seducer of his sister, the high-priest of adultery, a poisoner, a forger,
an assassin, a thief. The best and bravest citizens implored me to stand
up to him. But I reflected that this Fury asserted that he was supported
by Pompey and Crassus and Caesar. Caesar had an army at the gates. The
other two could raise another army when they pleased; and when they knew
that their names were thus made use of, they remained silent. They were
alarmed perhaps, because the laws which they had carried in the preceding
year were challenged by the new praetors, and were held by the Senate to
be invalid; and they were unwilling to alienate a popular tribune."[11]

And again elsewhere: "When I saw that the faction of Catiline was in
power, that the party which I had led, some from envy of myself, some from
fear for their own lives, had betrayed and deserted me; when the two
consuls had been purchased by promises of provinces, and had gone over to
my enemies, and the condition of the bargain was that I was to be
delivered over, tied and bound, to my enemies; when the Senate and knights
were in mourning, but were not allowed to bring my cause before the
people; when my blood had been made the seal of the arrangement under
which the State had been disposed of; when I saw all this, although 'the
good' were ready to fight for me, and were willing to die for me, I would
not consent, because I saw that victory or defeat would alike bring ruin
to the Commonwealth. The Senate was powerless. The Forum was ruled by
violence. In such a city there was no place for me." [12]

So Cicero, as he looked back afterwards, described the struggle in his own
mind. His friends had then rallied; Caesar was far away; and he could tell
his own story, and could pile his invectives on those who had injured him.
His matchless literary power has given him exclusive command over the
history of his time. His enemies' characters have been accepted from his
pen as correct portraits. If we allow his description of Clodius and the
two consuls to be true to the facts, what harder condemnation can be
pronounced against a political condition in which such men as these could
be raised to the first position in the State?[13] Dion says that Cicero's
resolution to yield did not wholly proceed from his own prudence, but was
assisted by advice from Cato and Hortensius the orator. Anyway, the blow
fell, and he went down before the stroke. His immortal consulship, in
praise of which he had written a poem, brought after it the swift
retribution which Caesar had foretold. When the vote proposed by Clodius
was carried, he fled to Sicily, with a tacit confession that he dared not
abide his trial, which would immediately have followed. Sentence was
pronounced upon him in his absence. His property was confiscated. His
houses in town and country were razed. The site of his palace in Rome was
dedicated to the Goddess of Liberty, and he himself was exiled. He was
forbidden to reside within four hundred miles of Rome, with a threat of
death if he returned; and he retired to Macedonia, to pour out his sorrows
and his resentments in lamentations unworthy of a woman.


[1] See a list of the Leges Juliae in the 48th Book of the Corpus Juris
    Civilis.

[2] _To Atticus_, ii. 16.

[3] "Tenemur undique, neque jam, quo minus serviamus, recusamus, sed
    mortem et ejectionem quasi majora timemus, quae multo sunt minora.
    Atque hic status, qui una voce omnium gemitur neque verbo cujusdam
    sublevatur."--_To Atticus_, ii. 18.

[4] "In concionem ascendit et Pompeium privatus dictatorem appellavit.
    Propius nihil est factum quam ut occideretur."--Cicero, _Ad Quintum
    Fratrem_, i. 2.

[5] _To Athens_, ii, 21. In this comparison Cicero betrays his naive
    conviction that Pompey was indebted to him and to his praises for his
    reputation. Here, as always, Cicero was himself the centre round
    which all else revolved or ought to revolve.

[6] _Ib_.

[7] To Atticus, ii. 22.

[8] "Jam familiariter cum illo etiam cavillor ac jocor."--_To
    Atticus_, ii. 1.

[9] _Oratio in L. Pisonem_.

[10] He seems to have even thought of suicide.--_To Atticus_, iii. 9.

[11] Abridged from the _Oratio pro P. Sextio_.

[12] _Oratio post reditum ad Quirites_.

[13] In a letter to his brother Quintus, written at a time when he did
    not know the real feelings of Caesar and Pompey, and had supposed
    that he had only to deal with Clodius, Cicero announced a distinct
    intention of resisting by force. He expected that the whole of Italy
    would be at his side. He said: "Si diem nobis Clodius dixerit, tota
    Italia concurret, ut multiplicata gloria discedamus. Sin autem vi
    agere conabitur, spero fore, studiis non solum amicorum, sedetiam
    alienorum, ut vi resistamus. Omnes et se et suos liberos, amicos,
    clientes, libertos, servos, pecunias denique suas pollicentur. Nostra
    antiqua manus bonorum ardet studio nostri atque amore. Si qui antea
    aut alieniores fuerant, ant languidiores, nunc horum regum odio se
    cum bonis conjungunt. Pompeius omnia pollicetur et Caesar, do quibus
    ita credo, ut nihil de mea comparatione deminuam."--_Ad Quintum
    Fratrem_, i. 2.




CHAPTER XIV.


From the fermentation of Roman politics, the passions of the Forum and
Senate, the corrupt tribunals, the poisoned centre of the Empire, the
story passes beyond the frontier of Italy. We no longer depend for our
account of Caesar on the caricatures of rival statesmen. He now becomes
himself our guide. We see him in his actions and in the picture of his
personal character which he has unconsciously drawn. Like all real great
men, he rarely speaks of himself. He tells us little or nothing of, his
own feelings or his own purposes. Cicero never forgets his individuality.
In every line that he wrote Cicero was attitudinizing for posterity, or
reflecting on the effect of his conduct upon his interests or his
reputation. Caesar is lost in his work; his personality is scarcely more
visible than Shakespeare's. He was now forty-three years old. His
abstemious habits had left his health unshaken. He was in the fullest
vigor of mind and body, and it was well for him that his strength had not
been undermined. He was going on an expedition which would make
extraordinary demands upon his energies. That he had not contemplated
operations so extended as those which were forced upon him is evident from
the nature of his preparations. His command in Further Gaul had been an
afterthought, occasioned probably by news which had been received of
movements in progress there during his consulship. Of the four legions
which were allowed to him, one only was beyond the Alps; three were at
Aquileia. It was late in life for him to begin the trade of a soldier; and
as yet, with the exception of his early service in Asia and a brief and
limited campaign in Spain when propraetor, he had no military experience
at all. His ambition hitherto had not pointed in that direction; nor is it
likely that a person of so strong an understanding would have contemplated
beforehand the deliberate undertaking of the gigantic war into which
circumstances immediately forced him. Yet he must have known that he had
to deal with a problem of growing difficulty. The danger to Italy from
inroads across the Alps was perpetually before the minds of thoughtful
Roman statesmen. Events were at that moment taking place among the Gallic
tribes which gave point to the general uneasiness. And unwilling as the
Romans were to extend their frontiers and their responsibilities in a
direction so unknown and so unpromising, yet some interference either by
arms or by authority beyond those existing limits was being pressed upon
them in self-defence.

The Transalpine Gaul of Caesar was the country included between the Rhine,
the ocean, the Pyrenees, the Mediterranean, and the Alps. Within these
limits, including Switzerland, there was at this time a population vaguely
estimated at six or seven millions. The Roman Province stretched along the
coast to the Spanish border; it was bounded on the north by the Cevennes
mountains, and for some generations by the Isere; but it had been found
necessary lately[1] to annex the territory of the Allobroges (Dauphine
and Savoy), and the proconsular authority was now extended to within a few
miles of Geneva. The rest was divided into three sections, inhabited by
races which, if allied, were distinctly different in language, laws, and
institutions. The Aquitani, who were connected with the Spaniards or
perhaps the Basques, held the country between the Pyrenees and the
Garonne. The Belgae, whom Caesar believed to have been originally Germans,
extended from the mouth of the Seine to the mouth of the Rhine, and inland
to the Marne and Moselle. The people whom the Romans meant especially when
they spoke of Gauls occupied all the remainder. At one time the Celts had
probably been masters of the whole of France, but had gradually yielded to
encroachment. According to the Druids, they came out of darkness, _ab
Dite Patre_; they called themselves Children of Night, counting time by
nights instead of days, as we say fortnight and sennight. Comparison of
language has taught us that they were a branch of the great Aryan race,
one of the first which rolled westward into Europe, before Greeks or
Latins had been heard of.

This once magnificent people was now in a state of change and
decomposition. On Aquitaine and Belgium Roman civilization had as yet
produced no effect. The severe habits of earlier generations remained
unchanged. The Gauls proper had yielded to contact with the Province and
to intercourse with Italian traders. They had built towns and villages.
They had covered the land with farms and homesteads. They had made roads.
They had bridged their rivers, even such rivers as the Rhone and the
Loire. They had amassed wealth, and had adopted habits of comparative
luxury, which, if it had not abated their disposition to fight, had
diminished their capacity for fighting. Their political and perhaps their
spiritual system was passing through analogous transformations. The
ancient forms remained, but an altered spirit was working under them. From
the earliest antiquity they had been divided into tribes and sub-tribes:
each tribe and sub-tribe being practically independent, or united only by
common objects and a common sentiment of race. The rule was the rule of
the strong, under the rudest forms of tribal organization. The chief was
either hereditary or elected, or won his command by the sword. The mass of
the people were serfs. The best fighters were self-made nobles, under the
chief's authority. Every man in the tribe was the chief's absolute
subject; the chief, in turn, was bound to protect the meanest of them
against injury from without. War, on a large scale or a small, had been
the occupation of their lives. The son was not admitted into his father's
presence till he was old enough to be a soldier. When the call to arms
went out, every man of the required age was expected at the muster, and
the last comer was tortured to death in the presence of his comrades as a
lesson against backwardness.

As the secular side of things bore a rude resemblance to feudalism, so on
the religious there was a similar anticipation of the mediaeval Catholic
Church. The Druids were not a special family, like the Levites, or in any
way born into the priesthood. They were an order composed of persons
selected, when young, out of the higher ranks of the community, either for
speciality of intellect, or from disposition, or by the will of their
parents, or from a desire to avoid military service, from which the Druids
were exempt. There were no tribal distinctions among them. Their head-
quarters were in Britain, to which those who aspired to initiation in the
more profound mysteries repaired for instruction; but they were spread
universally over Gaul and the British Islands. They were the ministers of
public worship, the depositaries of knowledge, and the guardians of public
morality. Young men repaired to the Druids for education. They taught
theology; they taught the movements of the stars. They presided in the
civil courts and determined questions of disputed inheritance. They heard
criminal cases and delivered judgment; and, as with the Church, their
heaviest and most dreaded punishment was excommunication. The
excommunicated person lost his civil rights. He became an outlaw from
society, and he was excluded from participation in the sacrifices. In the
religious services the victims most acceptable to the gods were human
beings--criminals, if such could be had; if not, then innocent persons,
who were burnt to death in huge towers of wicker. In the Quemadero at
Seville, as in our own Smithfield, the prisoners of the Church were
fastened to stakes, and the sticks with which they were consumed were tied
into fagots, instead of being plaited into basket-work. So slight a
difference does not materially affect the likeness.

The tribal chieftainship and the religious organization of the Druids were
both of them inherited from antiquity. They were institutions descending
from the time when the Gauls had been a great people; but both had
outlived the age to which they were adapted, and one at least was
approaching its end. To Caesar's eye, coming new upon them, the Druids
were an established fact, presenting no sign of decay; but in Gaul,
infected with Roman manners, they existed merely by habit, exercising no
influence any longer over the hearts of the people. In the great struggle
which was approaching we find no Druids among the national leaders, no
spirit of religion inspiring and consecrating the efforts of patriotism.
So far as can be seen, the Druids were on the Roman side, or the Romans
had the skill to conciliate them. In half a century they were suppressed
by Augustus, and they and their excommunications, and their flaming
wicker-works, had to be sought for in distant Britain or in the still more
distant Ireland. The active and secular leadership could not disappear so
easily. Leaders of some kind were still required and inevitably found, but
the method of selection in the times which had arrived was silently
changing. While the Gallic nation retained, or desired to retain, a kind
of unity, some one of the many tribes had always been allowed a hegemony.
The first place had rested generally with the aedui, a considerable people
who occupied the central parts of France, between the Upper Loire and the
Saone. The Romans, anxious naturally to extend their influence in the
country without direct interference, had taken the aedui under their
protectorate. The aedui again had their clients in the inferior tribes;
and a Romano-aeduan authority of a shadowy kind had thus penetrated
through the whole nation.

But the aeduans had rivals and competitors in the Sequani, another
powerful body in Burgundy and Franche-Comte. If the Romans feared, the
Gauls, the Gauls in turn feared the Romans; and a national party had
formed itself everywhere, especially among the younger men, who were proud
of their independence, impatient of foreign control, and determined to
maintain the liberties which had descended to them. To these the Sequani
offered themselves as champions. Among the aedui too there were fiery
spirits who cherished the old traditions, and saw in the Roman alliance a
prelude to annexation. And thus it was that when Caesar was appointed to
Gaul, in every tribe and every sub-tribe, in every village and every
family, there were two factions,[2] each under its own captain, each
struggling for supremacy, each conspiring and fighting among themselves,
and each seeking or leaning upon external support. In many, if not in all,
of the tribes there was a senate, or counsel of elders, and these appear
almost everywhere to have been aeduan and Roman in their sympathies. The
Sequani, as the representatives of nationalism, knowing that they could
not stand alone, had looked for friends elsewhere.

The Germans had long turned covetous eyes upon the rich cornfields and
pastures from which the Rhine divided them. The Cimbri and Teutons had
been but the vanguard of a multitude who were eager to follow. The fate of
these invaders had checked the impulse for half a century, but the lesson
was now forgotten. Ariovistus, a Bavarian prince, who spoke Gaelic like a
native, and had probably long meditated conquest, came over into Franche-
Comte at the invitation of the Sequani, bringing his people with him. The
few thousand families which were first introduced had been followed by
fresh detachments; they had attacked and beaten the aedui, out of whose
territories they intended to carve a settlement for themselves. They had
taken hostages from them, and had broken down their authority, and the
faction of the Sequani was now everywhere in the ascendant. The aedui,
three years before Caesar came, had appealed to Rome for assistance, and
the Senate had promised that the Governor of Gaul should support them. The
Romans, hoping to temporize with the danger, had endeavored to conciliate
Ariovistus, and in the year of Caesar's consulship had declared him a
friend of the Roman people. Ariovistus, in turn, had pressed the aedui
still harder, and had forced them to renounce the Roman alliance. Among
the aedui, and throughout the country, the patriots were in the ascendant,
and Ariovistus and his Germans were welcomed as friends and deliverers.
Thoughtful persons in Rome had heard of these doings with uneasiness; an
old aeduan chief had gone in person thither, to awaken the Senate to the
growing peril; but the Senate had been too much occupied with its fears of
Caesar, and agrarian laws, and dangers to the fish-ponds, to attend; and
now another great movement had begun, equally alarming and still closer to
the Roman border.

The Helvetii were old enemies. They were a branch of the Celtic race, who
occupied modern Switzerland, hardy, bold mountaineers, and seasoned in
constant war with their German neighbors. On them, too, the tide of
migration from the north had pressed continuously. They had hitherto
defended themselves successfully, but they were growing weary of these
constant efforts. Their numbers were increasing, and their narrow valleys
were too strait for them. They also had heard of fertile, scantily peopled
lands in other parts, of which they could possess themselves by force or
treaty, and they had already shown signs of restlessness. Many thousands
of them had broken out at the time of the Cimbrian invasion. They had
defeated Cassius Longinus, who was then consul, near their own border, and
had annihilated his army. They had carried fire and sword down the left
bank of the Rhone. They had united themselves with the Teutons, and had
intended to accompany them into Italy. Their first enterprise failed. They
perished in the great battle at Aix, and the parent tribe had remained
quiet for forty years till a new generation had grown to manhood. Once
more their ambition had revived. Like the Germans, they had formed
friendships among the Gallic factions. Their reputation as warriors made
them welcome to the patriots. In a fight for independence they would form
a valuable addition to the forces of their countrymen. They had allies
among the Sequani; they had allies in the anti-Roman party which had risen
among the Aedui; and a plan had been formed in concert with their friends
for a migration to the shores of the Bay of Biscay between the mouths of
the Garonne and the Loire. The Cimbri and Teutons had passed away, but the
ease with which the Cimbri had made the circuit of these districts had
shown how slight resistance could be expected from the inhabitants.
Perhaps their coming had been anticipated and prepared for. The older men
among the Helvetii had discouraged the project when it was first mooted,
but they had yielded to eagerness and enthusiasm, and it had taken at last
a practical form. Double harvests had been raised; provision had been made
of food and transport for a long march; and a complete exodus of the
entire tribe with their wives and families had been finally resolved on.

If the Helvetii deserted Switzerland, the cantons would be immediately
occupied by Germans, and a road would be opened into the province for the
enemy whom the Romans had most reason to dread. The distinction between
Germans and Gauls was not accurately known at Rome. They were confounded
under the common name of Celts[3] or Barbarians. But they formed
together an ominous cloud charged with forces of uncertain magnitude, but
of the reality of which Italy had already terrible experience. Divitiacus,
chief of the Aedui, who had carried to Rome the news of the inroads of
Ariovistus, brought again in person thither the account of this fresh
peril. Every large movement of population suggested the possibility of a
fresh rush across the Alps. Little energy was to be expected from the
Senate. But the body of the citizens were still sound at heart. Their
lives and properties were at stake, and they could feel for the dignity of
the Empire. The people had sent Pompey to crush the pirates and conquer
Mithridates. The people now looked to Caesar, and instead of the "woods
and forests" which the Senate designed for him, they had given him a five
years' command on their western frontier.

The details of the problem before him Caesar had yet to learn, but with
its general nature he must have intimately acquainted himself. Of course
he had seen and spoken with Divitiacus. He was consul when Ariovistus was
made "a friend of the Roman people." He must have been aware, therefore,
of the introduction of the Germans over the Rhine. He could not tell what
he might have first to do. There were other unpleasant symptoms on the
side of Illyria and the Danube. From either quarter the storm might break
upon him. No Roman general was ever sent upon an enterprise so fraught
with complicated possibilities, and few with less experience of the
realities of war.

The points in his favor were these. He was the ablest Roman then living,
and he had the power of attracting and attaching the ablest men to his
service. He had five years in which to look about him and to act at
leisure--as much time as had been given to Pompey for the East. Like
Pompey, too, he was left perfectly free. No senatorial officials could
encumber him with orders from home. The people had given him his command,
and to the people alone he was responsible. Lastly, and beyond everything,
he could rely with certainty on the material with which he had to work.
The Roman legionaries were no longer yeomen taken from the plough or
shopkeepers from the street. They were men more completely trained in
every variety of accomplishment than have perhaps ever followed a general
into the field before or since. It was not enough that they could use
sword and lance. The campaign on which Caesar was about to enter was
fought with spade and pick and axe and hatchet. Corps of engineers he may
have had; but if the engineers designed the work, the execution lay with
the army. No limited department would have been equal to the tasks which
every day demanded. On each evening after a march, a fortified camp was to
be formed, with mound and trench, capable of resisting surprises, and
demanding the labor of every single hand. Bridges had to be thrown over
rivers. Ships and barges had to be built or repaired, capable of service
against an enemy, on a scale equal to the requirements of an army, and in
a haste which permitted no delay. A transport service there must have been
organized to perfection; but there were no stores sent from Italy to
supply the daily waste of material. The men had to mend and perhaps make
their own clothes and shoes, and repair their own arms. Skill in the use
of tools was not enough without the tools themselves. Had the spades and
mattocks been supplied by contract, had the axes been of soft iron, fair
to the eye and failing to the stroke, not a man in Caesar's army would
have returned to Rome to tell the tale of its destruction. How the
legionaries acquired these various arts, whether the Italian peasantry
were generally educated in such occupations, or whether on this occasion
there was a special selection of the best, of this we have no information.
Certain only it was that men and instruments were as excellent in their
kind as honesty and skill could make them; and, however degenerate the
patricians and corrupt the legislature, there was sound stuff somewhere in
the Roman constitution. No exertion, no forethought on the part of a
commander could have extemporized such a variety of qualities. Universal
practical accomplishments must have formed part of the training of the
free Roman citizens. Admirable workmanship was still to be had in each
department of manufacture, and every article with which Caesar was
provided must have been the best of its kind.

The first quarter of the year 58 was consumed in preparations. Caesar's
antagonists in the Senate were still raving against the acts of his
consulship, threatening him with impeachment for neglecting Bibulus's
interpellations, charging him with impiety for disregarding the weather,
and clamoring for the suppression of his command. But Cicero's banishment
damped the ardor of these gentlemen; after a few vicious efforts, they
subsided into sullenness, and trusted to Ariovistus or the Helvetii to
relieve them of their detested enemy. Caesar himself selected his
officers. Cicero having declined to go as his lieutenant, he had chosen
Labienus, who had acted with him, when tribune, in the prosecution of
Rabirius, and had procured him the pontificate by giving the election to
the people. Young men of rank in large numbers had forgotten party
feeling, and had attached themselves to the expedition as volunteers to
learn military experience. His own equipments were of the simplest. No
common soldier was more careless of hardships than Caesar. His chief
luxury was a favorite horse, which would allow no one but Caesar to mount
him; a horse which had been bred in his own stables, and, from the
peculiarity of a divided hoof, had led the augurs to foretell wonders for
the rider of it. His arrangements were barely completed when news came in
the middle of March that the Helvetii were burning their towns and
villages, gathering their families into their wagons, and were upon the
point of commencing their emigration. Their numbers, according to a
register which was found afterward, were 368,000, of whom 92,000 were
fighting men. They were bound for the West; and there were two roads, by
one or other of which alone they could leave their country. One was on the
right bank of the Rhone by the Pas de l'Ecluse, a pass between the Jura
mountains and the river, so narrow that but two carts could go abreast
along it; the other, and easier, was through Savoy, which was now Roman.

Under any aspect the transit of so vast a body through Roman territory
could not but be dangerous. Savoy was the very ground on which Longinus
had been destroyed. Yet it was in this direction that the Helvetii were
preparing to pass, and would pass unless they were prevented; while in the
whole Transalpine province there was but a single legion to oppose them.
Caesar started on the instant. He reached Marseilles in a few days, joined
his legion, collected a few levies in the Province, and hurried to Geneva.
Where the river leaves the lake there was a bridge which the Helvetii had
neglected to occupy. Caesar broke it, and thus secured a breathing time.
The Helvetii, who were already on the move and were assembling in force a
few miles off, sent to demand a passage. If it was refused, there was more
than one spot between the lake and the Pas de l'Ecluse where the river
could be forded. The Roman force was small, and Caesar postponed his
reply.

It was the 1st of April; he promised an answer on the 15th. In the
interval he threw up forts, dug trenches, and raised walls at every point
where a passage could be attempted; and when the time was expired, he
declined to permit them to enter the Province. They tried to ford; they
tried boats; but at every point they were driven back. It remained for
them to go by the Pas de l'Ecluse. For this route they required the
consent of the Sequani; and, however willing the Sequani might be to see
them in their neighbors' territories, they might object to the presence in
their own of such a flight of devouring locusts. Evidently, however, there
was some general scheme, of which the entry of the Helvetii into Gaul was
the essential part; and through the mediation of Dumnorix, an Aeduan and
an ardent patriot, the Sequani were induced to agree.

The Province had been saved, but the exodus of the enormous multitude
could no longer be prevented. If such waves of population were allowed to
wander at pleasure, it was inevitable that sooner or later they would
overflow the borders of the Empire. Caesar determined to show, at once and
peremptorily, that these movements would not be permitted without the
Romans' consent. Leaving Labienus to guard the forts on the Rhone, he
hurried back to Italy, gathered up his three legions at Aquileia, raised
two more at Turin with extreme rapidity, and returned with them by the
shortest route over the Mont Genevre. The mountain tribes attacked him,
but could not even delay his march. In seven days he had surmounted the
passes, and was again with Labienus.

The Helvetii, meanwhile, had gone through the Pas de l'Ecluse, and were
now among the Aedui, laying waste the country. It was early in the summer.
The corn was green, the hay was still uncut, and the crops were being
eaten off the ground. The Aedui threw themselves on the promised
protection of Rome. Caesar crossed the Rhone above Lyons, and came up with
the marauding hosts as they were leisurely passing in boats over the
Saone. They had been twenty days upon the river, transporting their wagons
and their families. Three quarters of them were on the other side. The
Tigurini from Zurich, the most warlike of their tribes, were still on the
left bank. The Tigurini had destroyed the army of Longinus, and on them
the first retribution fell. Caesar cut them to pieces. A single day
sufficed to throw a bridge over the Saone, and the Helvetii, who had
looked for nothing less than to be pursued by six Roman legions, begged
for peace. They were willing, they said, to go to any part of the country
which Caesar would assign to them; and they reminded him that they might
be dangerous if pushed to extremities. Caesar knew that they were
dangerous. He had followed them because he knew it. He said that they must
return the way that they had come. They must pay for the injuries which
they had inflicted on the Aedui, and they must give him hostages for their
obedience. The fierce mountaineers replied that they had been more used to
demand hostages than to give them; and confident in their numbers, and in
their secret allies among the Gauls, they marched on through the Aeduan
territories up the level banks of the Saone, thence striking west toward
Autun.

Caesar had no cavalry; but every Gaul could ride, and he raised a few
thousand horse among his supposed allies. These he meant to employ to
harass the Helvetian march; but they were secret traitors, under the
influence of Dumnorix, and they fled at the first encounter. The Helvetii
had thus the country at their mercy, and they laid it waste as they went,
a day's march in advance of the Romans. So long as they kept by the river,
Caesar's stores accompanied him in barges. He did not choose to let the
Helvetii out of his sight, and when they left the Saone, and when he was
obliged to follow, his provisions ran short. He applied to the Aeduan
chiefs, who promised to furnish him, but they failed to do it. Ten days
passed, and no supplies came in. He ascertained at last that there was
treachery. Dumnorix and other Aeduan leaders were in correspondence with
the enemy. The cavalry defeat and the other failures were thus explained.
Caesar, who trusted much to gentleness and to personal influence, was
unwilling to add the Aeduii to his open enemies. Dumnorix was the brother
of Divitiacus, the reigning chief, whom Caesar had known in Rome.
Divitiacus was sent for, confessed with tears his brother's misdeeds, and
begged that he might be forgiven. Dumnorix was brought in. Caesar showed
that he was aware of his conduct; but spoke kindly to him, and cautioned
him for the future. The corn-carts, however, did not appear; supplies
could not be dispensed with; and the Romans, leaving the Helvetii, struck
off to Bibracte, on Mont Beauvray, the principal Aeduan town in the
highlands of Nivernais. Unfortunately for themselves, the Helvetii thought
the Romans were flying, and became in turn the pursuers. They gave Caesar
an opportunity, and a single battle ended them and their migrations. The
engagement lasted from noon till night. The Helvetii fought gallantly, and
in numbers were enormously superior; but the contest was between skill and
courage, sturdy discipline and wild valor; and it concluded as such
contests always must. In these hand-to-hand engagements there were no
wounded. Half the fighting men of the Swiss were killed; their camp was
stormed; the survivors, with the remnant of the women and children, or
such of them as were capable of moving (for thousands had perished, and
little more than a third remained of those who had left Switzerland),
straggled on to Langres, where they surrendered. Caesar treated the poor
creatures with kindness and care. A few were settled in Gaul, where they
afterward did valuable service. The rest were sent back to their own
cantons, lest the Germans should take possession of their lands; and lest
they should starve in the homes which they had desolated before their
departure, they were provided with food out of the Province till their
next crops were grown.

A victory so complete and so unexpected astonished the whole country. The
peace party recovered the ascendency. Envoys came from all the Gaulish
tribes to congratulate, and a diet of chiefs was held under Caesar's
presidency, where Gaul and Roman seemed to promise one another eternal
friendship. As yet, however, half the mischief only had been dealt with,
and that the lighter part. The Helvetii were disposed of, but the Germans
remained; and till Ariovistus was back across the Rhone, no permanent
peace was possible. Hitherto Caesar had only received vague information
about Ariovistus. When the diet was over, such of the chiefs as were
sincere in their professions came to him privately and explained what the
Germans were about. A hundred and twenty thousand of them were now settled
near Belfort, and between the Vosges and the Rhine, with the connivance of
the Sequani. More were coming, and in a short time Gaul would be full of
them. They had made war on the Aedui; they were in correspondence with the
anti-Roman factions; their object was the permanent occupation of the
country.

Two months still remained of summer. Caesar was now conveniently near to
the German positions. His army was in high spirits from its victory, and
he himself was prompt in forming resolutions and swift in executing them.
An injury to the Aedui could be treated as an injury to the Romans, which
it would be dishonor to pass over. If the Germans were allowed to overrun
Gaul, they might soon be seen again in Italy.

Ariovistus was a "friend of Rome." Caesar had been himself a party to the
conferring this distinction upon him. As a friend, therefore, he was in
the first instance to be approached. Caesar sent to invite him to a
conference. Ariovistus, it seemed, set small value upon his honors. He
replied that if he needed anything from Caesar, he would go to Caesar and
ask for it. If Caesar required anything from him, Caesar might do the
same. Meanwhile Caesar was approaching a part of Gaul which belonged to
himself by right of conquest, and he wished to know the meaning of the
presence of a Roman army there.

After such an answer, politeness ceased to be necessary. Caesar rejoined
that since Ariovistus estimated so lightly his friendship with the Romans
as to refuse an amicable meeting, he would inform him briefly of his
demands upon him. The influx of Germans on the Rhine must cease: no more
must come in. He must restore the hostages which he had taken from the
Aedui, and do them no further hurt. If Ariovistus complied, the Romans
would continue on good terms with him. If not, he said that by a decree of
the Senate the Governor of Gaul was ordered to protect the Aedui, and he
intended to do it.

Ariovistus answered that he had not interfered with the Romans; and the
Romans had no right to interfere with him. Conquerors treated their
subjects as they pleased. The Aedui had begun the quarrel with him. They
had been defeated, and were now his vassals. If Caesar chose to come
between him and his subjects, he would have an opportunity of seeing how
Germans could fight who had not for fourteen years slept under a roof.

It was reported that a large body of Suevi were coming over the Rhine to
swell Ariovistus's force, and that Ariovistus was on the point of
advancing to seize Besancon. Besancon was a position naturally strong,
being surrounded on three sides by the Doubs. It was full of military
stores, and was otherwise important for the control of the Sequani. Caesar
advanced swiftly and took possession of the place, and announced that he
meant to go and look for Ariovistus.

The army so far had gained brilliant successes, but the men were not yet
fully acquainted with the nature of their commander. They had never yet
looked Germans in the face, and imagination magnifies the unknown. Roman
merchants and the Gauls of the neighborhood brought stories of the
gigantic size and strength of these northern warriors. The glare of their
eyes was reported to be so fierce that it could not be borne. They were
wild, wonderful, and dreadful. Young officers, patricians and knights, who
had followed Caesar for a little mild experience, began to dislike the
notion of these new enemies. Some applied for leave of absence; others,
though ashamed to ask to be allowed to leave the army, cowered in their
tents with sinking hearts, made their wills, and composed last messages
for their friends. The centurions caught the alarm from their superiors,
and the legionaries from the centurions. To conceal their fear of the
Germans, the men discovered that, if they advanced farther, it would be
through regions where provisions could not follow them, and that they
would be starved in the forests. At length, Caesar was informed that if he
gave the order to march, the army would refuse to move.

Confident in himself, Caesar had the power, so indispensable for a
soldier, of inspiring confidence in others as soon as they came to know
what he was. He called his officers together. He summoned the centurions,
and rebuked them sharply for questioning his purposes. The German king, he
said, had been received at his own request into alliance with the Romans,
and there was no reason to suppose that he meant to break with them. Most
likely he would do what was required of him. If not, was it to be
conceived that they were afraid? Marius had beaten these same Germans.
Even the Swiss had beaten them. They were no more formidable than other
barbarians. They might trust their commander for the commissariat. The
harvest was ripe, and the difficulties were nothing. As to the refusal to
march, he did not believe in it. Romans never mutinied, save through the
rapacity or incompetence of their general. His life was a witness that he
was not rapacious, and his victory over the Helvetii that as yet he had
made no mistake. He should order the advance on the next evening, and it
would then be seen whether sense of duty or cowardice was the stronger. If
others declined, Caesar said that he should go forward alone with the
legion which he knew would follow him, the 10th, which was already his
favorite.

The speech was received with enthusiasm. The 10th thanked Caesar for his
compliment to them. The rest, officers and men, declared their willingness
to follow wherever he might lead them. He started with Divitiacus for a
guide; and, passing Belfort, came in seven days to Cernay or to some point
near it. Ariovistus was now but four-and-twenty miles from him. Since
Caesar had come so far, Ariovistus said that he was willing to meet him.
Day and place were named, the conditions being that the armies should
remain in their ranks, and that Caesar and he might each bring a guard of
horse to the interview. He expected that Caesar would be contented with an
escort of the Aeduan cavalry. Caesar, knowing better than to trust himself
with Gauls, mounted his 10th legion, and with them proceeded to the spot
which Ariovistus had chosen. It was a tumulus, in the centre of a large
plain equidistant from the two camps. The guard on either side remained
two hundred paces in the rear. The German prince and the Roman general met
on horseback at the mound, each accompanied by ten of his followers.
Caesar spoke first and fairly. He reminded Ariovistus of his obligations
to the Romans. The Aedui, he said, had from immemorial time been the
leading tribe in Gaul. The Romans had an alliance with them of old
standing, and never deserted their friends. He required Ariovistas to
desist from attacking them, and to return their hostages. He consented
that the Germans already across the Rhine might remain in Gaul, but he
demanded a promise that no more should be brought over.

Ariovistus haughtily answered that he was a great king; that he had come
into Gaul by the invitation of the Gauls themselves; that the territory
which he occupied was a gift from them; and that the hostages of which
Caesar spoke had remained with him with their free consent. The Aedui, he
said, had begun the war, and, being defeated, were made justly to pay
forfeit. He had sought the friendship of the Romans, expecting to profit
by it. If friendship meant the taking away his subjects from him, he
desired no more of such friendship. The Romans had their Province. It was
enough for them, and they might remain there unmolested. But Caesar's
presence so far beyond his own borders was a menace to his own
independence, and his independence he intended to maintain. Caesar must go
away out of those parts, or he and his Germans would know how to deal with
him.

Then, speaking perhaps more privately, he told Caesar that he knew
something of Rome and of the Roman Senate, and had learnt how the great
people there stood affected toward the Governor of Gaul. Certain members
of the Roman aristocracy had sent him messages to say that if he killed
Caesar they would hold it a good service done,[4] and would
hold him their friend forever. He did not wish, he said, to bind himself
to these noble persons. He would prefer Caesar rather; and would fight
Caesar's battles for him anywhere in the world if Caesar would but retire
and leave him. Ariovistus was misled, not unnaturally, by these strange
communications from the sovereign rulers of the Empire. He did not know,
he could not know, that the genius of Rome and the true chief of Rome were
not in the treacherous Senate, but were before him there on the field in
the persons of Caesar and his legions.

More might have passed between them; but Ariovistus thought to end the
conference by a stroke of treachery. His German guard had stolen round to
where the Romans stood, and, supposing that they had Gauls to deal with,
were trying to surround and disarm them. The men of the 10th legion stood
firm; Caesar fell back and joined them, and, contenting themselves with
simply driving off the enemy, they rode back to the camp.

[Sidenote: B.C. 57.]
The army was now passionate for an engagement. Ariovistus affected a
desire for further communication, and two officers were despatched to hear
what he had to say; but they were immediately seized and put in chains,
and the Germans advanced to within a few miles of the Roman outposts. The
Romans lay entrenched near Cernay. The Germans were at Colmar. Caesar
offered battle, which Ariovistus declined. Cavalry fights happened daily
which led to nothing. Caesar then formed a second camp, smaller but
strongly fortified, within sight of the enemy, and threw two legions into
it. Ariovistus attacked them, but he was beaten back with loss. The "wise
women" advised him to try no more till the new moon. But Caesar would not
wait for the moon, and forced an engagement. The wives and daughters of
the Germans rushed about their camp, with streaming hair, adjuring their
countrymen to save them from slavery. The Germans fought like heroes; but
they could not stand against the short sword and hand-to-hand grapple of
the legionaries. Better arms and better discipline again asserted the
superiority; and in a few hours the invaders were flying wildly to the
Rhine. Young Publius Crassus, the son of the millionaire, pursued with
the cavalry. A few swam the river; a few, Ariovistus among them, escaped
in boats; all the rest, men and women alike, were cut down and killed. The
Suevi, who were already on the Rhine, preparing to cross, turned back into
their forests; and the two immediate perils which threatened the peace of
Gaul had been encountered and trampled out in a single summer. The first
campaign was thus ended. The legions were distributed in winter quarters
among the Sequani, the contrivers of the mischief; and Labienus was left
in charge of them. Caesar went back over the Alps to the Cisalpine
division of the Province to look into the administration and to
communicate with his friends in Rome.

In Gaul there was outward quiet; but the news of the Roman victories
penetrated the farthest tribes and agitated the most distant households on
the shores of the North Sea. The wintering of the legions beyond the
province was taken to indicate an intention of permanent conquest. The
Gauls proper were divided and overawed; but the Belgians of the north were
not prepared to part so easily with their liberty. The Belgians considered
that they too were menaced, and that now or never was the time to strike
for their independence. They had not been infected with Roman manners.
They had kept the merchants from their borders with their foreign
luxuries. The Nervii, the fiercest of them, as the abstemious Caesar marks
with approbation, were water-drinkers, and forbade wine to be brought
among them, as injurious to their sinews and their courage. Caesar learnt
while in Italy from Labienus that the Belgae were mustering and combining.
A second vast horde of Germans were in Flanders and Artois; men of the
same race with the Belgae and in active confederacy with them. They might
have been left in peace, far off as they were, had they sat still; but the
notes of their preparations were sounding through the country and feeding
the restless spirit which was stunned but not subdued.

Caesar, on his own responsibility, raised two more legions and sent them
across the Alps in the spring. When the grass began to grow he followed
himself. Suddenly, before any one looked for him, he was on the Marne with
his army. The Remi (people of Rheims), startled by his unexpected
appearance, sent envoys with their submission and offers of hostages. The
other Belgian tribes, they said, were determined upon war, and were
calling all their warriors under arms. Their united forces were reported
to amount to 300,000. The Bellovaci from the mouth of the Seine had sent
60,000; the Suessiones from Soissons 50,000; the Nervii, between the
Sambre and the Scheldt, 50,000; Arras and Amiens, 25,000; the coast
tribes, 36,000; and the tribes between the Ardennes and the Rhine, called
collectively Germani, 40,000 more. This irregular host was gathered in the
forests between Laon and Soissons.

Caesar did not wait for them to move. He advanced at once to Rheims, where
he called the Senate together and encouraged them to be constant to the
Roman alliance. He sent a party of Aedui down the Seine to harass the
territory of the Bellovaci and recall them to their own defence; and he
went on himself to the Aisne, which he crossed by a bridge already
existing at Berry-au-Bac. There, with the bridge and river at his back, he
formed an entrenched camp of extraordinary strength, with a wall 12 feet
high and a fosse 22 feet deep. Against an attack with modern artillery
such defences would, of course, be idle. As the art of war then stood,
they were impregnable. In this position Caesar waited, leaving six cohorts
on the left bank to guard the other end of the bridge. The Belgae came
forward and encamped in his front. Their watch-fires at night were seen
stretching along a line eight miles wide. Caesar, after feeling his way
with his cavalry, found a rounded ridge projecting like a promontory into
the plain where the Belgian host was lying. On this he advanced his
legions, protecting his flanks with continuous trenches and earthworks, on
which were placed heavy cross-bows, the ancient predecessors of cannon.
Between these lines, if he attacked the enemy and failed, he had a secure
retreat. A marsh lay between the armies; and each waited for the other to
cross. The Belgians, impatient of delay, flung themselves suddenly on one
side and began to pour across the river, intending to destroy the cohorts
on the other bank, to cut the bridge, and burn and plunder among the Remi.
Caesar calmly sent back his cavalry and his archers and slingers. They
caught the enemy in the water or struggling out of it in confusion; all
who had got over were killed; multitudes were slaughtered in the river;
others, trying to cross on the bodies of their comrades, were driven back.
The confederates, shattered at a single defeat, broke up like an exploded
shell. Their provisions had run short. They melted away and dispersed to
their homes, Labienus pursuing and cutting down all that he could
overtake.

The Roman loss was insignificant in this battle. The most remarkable
feature in Caesar's campaigns, and that which indicates most clearly his
greatness as a commander, was the smallness of the number of men that he
ever lost, either by the sword or by wear and tear. No general was ever so
careful of his soldiers' lives.

Soissons, a fortified Belgian town, surrendered the next day. From
Soissons Caesar marched on Breteuil and thence on Amiens, which
surrendered also. The Bellovaci sent in their submission, the leaders of
the war party having fled to Britain. Caesar treated them all with
scrupulous forbearance, demanding nothing but hostages for their future
good behavior. His intention at this time was apparently not to annex any
of these tribes to Rome, but to settle the country in a quasi-independence
under an Aeduan hegemony.

But the strongest member of the confederacy was still unsubdued. The
hardy, brave, and water-drinking Nervii remained defiant. The Nervii would
send no envoys; they would listen to no terms of peace.[5] Caesar
learnt that they were expecting to be joined by the Aduatuci, a tribe of
pure Germans, who had been left behind near Liege at the time of the
invasion of the Teutons. Preferring to engage them separately, he marched
from Amiens through Cambray, and sent forward some officers and pioneers
to choose a spot for a camp on the Sambre. Certain Gauls, who had observed
his habits on march, deserted to the Nervii, and informed them that
usually a single legion went in advance, the baggage-wagons followed, and
the rest of the army came in the rear. By a sudden attack in front they
could overwhelm the advanced troops, plunder the carts, and escape before
they could be overtaken. It happened that on this occasion the order was
reversed. The country was enclosed with thick fences, which required to be
cut through. Six legions marched in front, clearing a road; the carts came
next, and two legions behind. The site selected by the officers was on the
left bank of the Sambre at Maubeuge, fifty miles above Namur. The ground
sloped easily down to the river, which was there about a yard in depth.
There was a corresponding rise on the other side, which was densely
covered with wood. In this wood the whole force of the Nervii lay
concealed, a few only showing themselves on the water side. Caesar's light
horse which had gone forward, seeing a mere handful of stragglers, rode
through the stream and skirmished with them; but the enemy retired under
cover; the horse did not pursue; the six legions came up, and, not
dreaming of the nearness of the enemy, laid aside their arms and went to
work intrenching with spade and mattock. The baggage-wagons began
presently to appear at the crest of the hill, the signal for which the
Nervii had waited; and in a moment all along the river sixty thousand of
them rushed out of the forest, sent the cavalry flying, and came on so
impetuously that, as Caesar said, they seemed to be in the wood, in the
water, and up the opposite bank at sword's point with the legions at the
same moment. The surprise was complete: the Roman army was in confusion.
Many of the soldiers were scattered at a distance, cutting turf. None were
in their ranks, and none were armed. Never in all his campaigns was Caesar
in greater danger. He could himself give no general orders which there was
time to observe. Two points only, he said, were in his favor. The men
themselves were intelligent and experienced, and knew what they had to do;
and the officers were all present, because he had directed that none of
them should leave their companies till the camp was completed. The troops
were spread loosely in their legions along the brow of the ridge. Caesar
joined the 10th on his right wing, and had but time to tell the men to be
cool and not to agitate themselves, when the enemy were upon them. So
sudden was the onslaught that they could neither put their helmets on, nor
strip the coverings from their shields, nor find their places in the
ranks. They fought where they stood among thick hedges which obstructed
the sight of what was passing elsewhere. Though the Aduatuci had not come
up, the Nervii had allies with them from Arras and the Somme. The allies
encountered the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th legions, and were driven rapidly
back down the hill through the river. The Romans, led by Labienus, crossed
in pursuit, followed them into the forest, and took their camp. The Nervii
meanwhile flung themselves with all their force on the two legions on the
left, the 12th and 7th, enveloped them with their numbers, penetrated
behind them, and fell upon the baggage-wagons. The light troops and the
camp-followers fled in all directions. The legionaries, crowded together
in confusion, were fighting at disadvantage, and were falling thick and
fast. A party of horse from Treves, who had come to treat with Caesar,
thought that all was lost, and rode off to tell their countrymen that the
Romans were destroyed.

Caesar, who was in the other wing, learning late what was going on,
hurried to the scene. He found the standards huddled together, the men
packed so close that they could not use their swords, almost all the
officers killed or wounded, and one of the best of them, Sextius Baculus
(Caesar always paused in his narrative to note any one who specially
distinguished himself), scarce able to stand. Caesar had come up unarmed.
He snatched a shield from a soldier, and, bareheaded, flew to the front.
He was known; he addressed the centurions by their names. He bade them
open their ranks and give the men room to strike. His presence and his
calmness gave them back their confidence. In the worst extremities he
observes that soldiers will fight well under their commander's eye. The
cohorts formed into order. The enemy was checked. The two legions from the
rear, who had learnt the danger from the flying camp-followers, came up.
Labienus, from the opposite hill, saw what had happened, and sent the 10th
legion back. All was now changed. The fugitives, ashamed of their
cowardice, rallied, and were eager to atone for it. The Nervii fought with
a courage which filled Caesar with admiration--men of greater spirit he
said that he had never seen. As their first ranks fell, they piled the
bodies of their comrades into heaps, and from the top of them hurled back
the Roman javelins. They would not fly; they dropped where they stood; and
the battle ended only with their extermination. Out of 600 senators there
survived but three; out of 60,000 men able to bear arms, only 500. The
aged of the tribe, and the women and children, who had been left in the
morasses for security, sent in their surrender, their warriors being all
dead. They professed to fear lest they might be destroyed by neighboring
clans who were on bad terms with them. Caesar received them and protected
them, and gave severe injunctions that they should suffer no injury.

By the victory over the Nervii the Belgian confederacy was almost
extinguished. The German Aduatuci remained only to be brought to
submission. They had been on their way to join their countrymen; they were
too late for the battle, and returned and shut themselves up in Namur, the
strongest position in the Low Countries. Caesar, after a short rest,
pushed on and came under their walls. The Aduatuci were a race of giants,
and were at first defiant. When they saw the Romans' siege-towers in
preparation, they could not believe that men so small could move such vast
machines. When the towers began to approach, they lost heart and sued for
terms. Caesar promised to spare their lives and properties if they
surrendered immediately, but he refused to grant conditions. They had
prayed to be allowed to keep their arms; affecting to believe, like the
Nervii, that they would be in danger from the Gauls if they were unable to
defend themselves. Caesar undertook that they should have no hurt, but he
insisted that their arms must be given up. They affected obedience. They
flung their swords and lances over the walls till the ditch was filled
with them. They opened their gates; the Romans occupied them, but were
forbidden to enter, that there might be no plundering. It seems that there
was a desperate faction among the Aduatuci who had been for fighting to
extremity. A third part of the arms had been secretly reserved, and after
midnight the tribe sallied with all their force, hoping to catch the
Romans sleeping. Caesar was not to be surprised a second time. Expecting
that some such attempt might be made, he had prepared piles of fagots in
convenient places. These bonfires were set blazing in an instant. By their
red light the legions formed; and, after a desperate but unequal combat,
the Germans were driven into the town again, leaving 4,000 dead. In the
morning the gates were broken down, and Namur was taken without more
resistance. Caesar's usual practice was gentleness. He honored brave men,
and never punished bold and open opposition. Of treachery he made a severe
example. Namur was condemned. The Aduatuci within its walls were sold into
slavery, and the contractors who followed the army returned the number of
prisoners whom they had purchased at 53,000. Such captives were the most
valuable form of spoil.

The Belgae were thus crushed as completely as the Gauls had been crushed
in the previous year. Publius Crassus had meanwhile made a circuit of
Brittany, and had received the surrender of the maritime tribes. So great
was the impression made by these two campaigns, that the Germans beyond
the Rhine sent envoys with offers of submission. The second season was
over. Caesar left the legions in quarters about Chartres, Orleans, and
Blois. He himself returned to Italy again, where his presence was
imperatively required. The Senate, on the news of his successes, had been
compelled, by public sentiment, to order an extraordinary thanksgiving;
but there were men who were anxious to prevent Caesar from achieving any
further victories since Ariovistus had failed to destroy him.


[1] Perhaps in consequence of the Catiline conspiracy.

[2] "In Gallia non solum in omnibus civitatibus atque in omnibus pagis
    partibusque sed paene etiam in singulis domibus factiones sunt,
    earumque factionum principes sunt qui summam auctoritatem eorum
    judicio habere existimantur.... Haec est ratio in summa totius
    Galliae, namque omnes civitates in partes divisae sunt duas. Cum
    Caesar in Galliam venit, alterius factionis principes erant Haedui,
    alterius Sequani."--_De Bello Gallico_, lib. vi. capp. 11, 12.

[3] Even Dion Cassius speaks of the Germans as _Keltoi_.

[4] "Id se ab ipsis per eorum nuntios compertum habere, quorum omnium
    gratiam atque amicitiam ejus morte redimere posset."--_De Bell.
    Gall_., i. 44.

[5] Caesar thus records his admiration of the Nervian character: "Quorum
    de natura moribusque Caesar cum quaereret sic reperiebat, nullum
    aditum esse ad eos mercatoribus; nihil pati vini reliquarumque rerum
    ad luxuriam pertinentium inferri, quod iis rebus relanguescere animos
    eorum et remitti virtutem existimarent: esse homines feros magnaeque
    virtutis; increpitare atque incusare reliquos Belgas qui se populo
    Romano dedidissent patriamque virtutem projecissent; confirmare sese
    neque legatos missuros neque ullam conditionem pacis
    accepturos."--_De Bell. Gall_., ii. 15.




CHAPTER XV.


[Sidenote B.C.58]
Before his own catastrophe, and before he could believe that he was in
danger, Cicero had discerned clearly the perils which threatened the
State. The Empire was growing more extensive. The "Tritons of the fish-
ponds" still held the reins; and believed their own supreme duty was to
divide the spoils among themselves. The pyramid was standing on its point.
The mass which rested on it was becoming more portentous and unwieldy. The
Senate was the official power; the armies were the real power; and the
imagination of the Senate was that after each conquest the soldiers would
be dismissed back into humble life unrewarded, while the noble lords took
possession of the new acquisitions, and added new millions to their
fortunes. All this Cicero knew, and yet he had persuaded himself that it
could continue without bringing on a catastrophe. He saw his fellow-
senators openly bribed; he saw the elections become a mere matter of
money. He saw adventurers pushing themselves into office by steeping
themselves in debt, and paying their debts by robbing the provincials. He
saw these high-born scoundrels coming home loaded with treasure, buying
lands and building palaces, and, when brought to trial, purchasing the
consciences of their judges. Yet he had considered such phenomena as the
temporary accidents of a constitution which was still the best that could
be conceived, and every one that doubted the excellence of it he had come
to regard as an enemy of mankind. So long as there was free speech in
Senate and platform for orators like himself, all would soon be well
again. Had not he, a mere country gentleman's son, risen under it to
wealth and consideration? and was not his own rise a sufficient evidence
that there was no real injustice? Party struggles were over, or had no
excuse for continuance. Sylla's constitution had been too narrowly
aristocratic. But Sylla's invidious laws had been softened by compromise.
The tribunes had recovered their old privileges. The highest offices of
State were open to the meanest citizen who was qualified for them.
Individuals of merit might have been kept back for a time by jealousy; the
Senate had too long objected to the promotion of Pompey; but their
opposition had been overcome by purely constitutional means. The great
general had obtained his command by land and sea; he, Cicero, having by
eloquent speech proved to the people that he ought to be nominated. What
could any one wish for more? And yet Senate and Forum were still filled
with faction, quarrel, and discontent! One interpretation only Cicero had
been able to place on such a phenomenon. In Rome, as in all great
communities, there were multitudes of dissolute, ruined wretches, the
natural enemies of property and order. Bankrupt members of the aristocracy
had lent themselves to these people as their leaders, and had been the
cause of all the trouble of the past years. If such renegades to their
order could be properly discouraged or extinguished, Cicero had thought
that there would be nothing more to desire. Catiline he had himself made
an end of to his own immortal glory, but now Catiline had revived in
Clodius; and Clodius, so far from being discouraged, was petted and
encouraged by responsible statesmen who ought to have known better. Caesar
had employed him; Crassus had employed him; even Pompey had stooped to
connect himself with the scandalous young incendiary, and had threatened
to call in the army if the Senate attempted to repeal Caesar's iniquitous
laws.[1] Still more inexplicable was the ingratitude of the aristocracy
and their friends, the "boni" or good--the "Conservatives of the State,"
[2]  as Cicero still continued to call Caesar's opponents. He respected
them; he loved them; he had done more for their cause than any single man
in the Empire; and yet they had never recognized his services by word or
deed. He had felt tempted to throw up public life in disgust, and retire
to privacy and philosophy.

So Cicero had construed the situation before his exile, and he had
construed it ill. If he had wished to retire he could not. He had been
called to account for the part of his conduct for which he most admired
himself. The ungracious Senate, as guilty as he, if guilt there had been,
had left him to bear the blame of it, and he saw himself driven into
banishment by an insolent reprobate, a patrician turned Radical and
demagogue, Publius Clodius. Indignity could be carried no farther.

Clodius is the most extraordinary figure in this extraordinary period. He
had no character. He had no distinguished talent save for speech; he had
no policy; he was ready to adopt any cause or person which for the moment
was convenient to him; and yet for five years this man was the omnipotent
leader of the Roman mob. He could defy justice, insult the consuls, beat
the tribunes, parade the streets with a gang of armed slaves, killing
persons disagreeable to him; and in the Senate itself he had his high
friends and connections who threw a shield over him when his audacity had
gone beyond endurance. We know Clodius only from Cicero; and a picture of
him from a second hand might have made his position more intelligible, if
not more reputable. Even in Rome it is scarcely credible that the Clodius
of Cicero could have played such a part, or that the death of such a man
should have been regarded as a national calamity. Cicero says that Clodius
revived Catiline's faction; but what was Catiline's faction? or how came
Catiline to have a faction which survived him?

Be this as it may, Clodius had banished Cicero, and had driven him away
over the seas to Greece, there, for sixteen months, to weary Heaven and
his friends with his lamentations. Cicero had refused Caesar's offered
friendship; Caesar had not cared to leave so powerful a person free to
support the intended attacks on his legislation, and had permitted,
perhaps had encouraged, the prosecution. Cicero out of the way, the second
person whose presence in Rome Caesar thought might be inconvenient, Marcus
Cato, had been got rid of by a process still more ingenious. The
aristocracy pretended that the acts of Caesar's consulship had been
invalid through disregard of the interdictions of Bibulus; and one of
those acts had been the reduction of Clodius to the order of plebeians. If
none of them were valid, Clodius was not legally tribune, and no
commission which Clodius might confer through the people would have
validity. A service was discovered by which Cato was tempted, and which he
was induced to accept at Clodius's hands. Thus he was at once removed from
the city, and it was no longer open to him to deny that Caesar's laws had
been properly passed. The work on which he was sent deserves a few words.
The kingdom of Cyprus had long been attached to the crown of Egypt.
Ptolemy Alexander, dying in the year 80, had bequeathed both Egypt and
Cyprus to Rome; but the Senate had delayed to enter on their bequest,
preferring to share the fines which Ptolemy's natural heirs were required
to pay for being spared. One of these heirs, Ptolemy Auletes, or "the
Piper," father of the famous Cleopatra, was now reigning in Egypt, and was
on the point of being expelled by his subjects. He had been driven to
extortion to raise a subsidy for the senators, and he had made himself
universally abhorred. Ptolemy of Cyprus had been a better sovereign, but a
less prudent client. He had not overtaxed his people; he had kept his
money. Clodius, if Cicero's story is true, had a private grudge against
him. Clodius had fallen among Cyprian pirates. Ptolemy had not exerted
himself for his release, and he had suffered unmentionable indignities. At
all events, the unfortunate king was rich, and was unwilling to give what
was expected of him. Clodius, on the plea that the King of Cyprus
protected pirates, persuaded the Assembly to vote the annexation of the
island; and Cato, of all men, was prevailed on by the mocking tribune to
carry out the resolution. He was well pleased with his mission, though he
wished it to appear to be forced upon him. Ptolemy poisoned himself; Cato
earned the glory of adding a new province to the Empire, and did not
return for two years, when he brought 7,000 talents--a million and a half
of English money--to the Roman treasury.

Cicero and Cato being thus put out of the way--Caesar being absent in
Gaul, and Pompey looking on without interfering--Clodius had amused
himself with legislation. He gratified his corrupt friends in the Senate
by again abolishing the censor's power to expel them. He restored cheap
corn establishments in the city--the most demoralizing of all the measures
which the democracy had introduced to swell their numbers. He re-
established the political clubs, which were hot-beds of distinctive
radicalism. He took away the right of separate magistrates to lay their
vetoes on the votes of the sovereign people, and he took from the Senate
such power as they still possessed of regulating the government of the
provinces, and passed it over to the Assembly. These resolutions, which
reduced the administration to a chaos, he induced the people to decree by
irresistible majorities. One measure only he passed which deserved
commendation, though Clodius deserved none for introducing it. He put an
end to the impious pretence of "observing the heavens," of which
conservative officials had availed themselves to obstruct unwelcome
motions. Some means were, no doubt, necessary to check the precipitate
passions of the mob; but not means which turned into mockery the slight
surviving remnants of ancient Roman reverence.

In general politics the young tribune had no definite predilections. He
had threatened at one time to repeal Caesar's laws himself. He attacked
alternately the chiefs of the army and of the Senate, and the people let
him do what he pleased without withdrawing their confidence from him. He
went everywhere spreading terror with his body-guard of slaves. He
quarrelled with the consuls, beat their lictors, and wounded Gabinius
himself. Pompey professed to be in alarm for his life, and to be unable to
appear in the streets. The state of Rome at this time has been well
described by a modern historian as a "Walpurgis dance of political
witches." [3]

Clodius was a licensed libertine; but license has its limits. He had been
useful so far; but a rein was wanted for him, and Pompey decided at last
that Cicero might now be recalled. Clodius's term of office ran out. The
tribunes for the new year were well disposed to Cicero. The new consuls
were Lentulus, a moderate aristocrat, and Cicero's personal friend, and
Metellus Nepos, who would do what Pompey told him. Caesar had been
consulted by letter and had given his assent. Cicero, it might be thought,
had learnt his lesson, and there was no desire of protracting his penance.
There were still difficulties, however. Cicero, smarting from wrath and
mortification, was more angry with the aristocrats, who had deserted him,
than with his open enemies. His most intimate companions, he bitterly
said, had been false to him. He was looking regretfully on Caesar's
offers,[4] and cursing his folly for having rejected them. The people,
too, would not sacrifice their convictions at the first bidding for the
convenience of their leaders; and had neither forgotten nor forgiven the
killing of the Catiline conspirators; while Cicero, aware of the efforts
which were being made, had looked for new allies in an imprudent quarter.
His chosen friend on the conservative side was now Annius Milo, one of the
new tribunes, a man as disreputable as Clodius himself; deep in debt and
looking for a province to indemnify himself--famous hitherto in the
schools of gladiators, in whose arts he was a proficient, and whose
services were at his disposal for any lawless purpose.

[Sidenote: B.C. 57.]
A decree of banishment could only be recalled by the people who had
pronounced it. Clodius, though no longer in office, was still the idol of
the mob; and two of the tribunes, who were at first well inclined to
Cicero, had been gained over by him. As early as possible, on the first
day of the new year, Lentulus Spinther brought Cicero's case before the
Senate. A tribune reminded him of a clause, attached to the sentence of
exile, that no citizen should in future move for its repeal. The Senate
hesitated, perhaps catching at the excuse; but at length, after repeated
adjournments, they voted that the question should be proposed to the
Assembly. The day fixed was the 25th of January. In anticipation of a riot
the temples on the Forum were occupied with guards. The Forum itself and
the senate-house were in possession of Clodius and his gang. Clodius
maintained that the proposal to be submitted to the people was itself
illegal, and ought to be resisted by force. Fabricius, one of the
tribunes, had been selected to introduce it. When Fabricius presented
himself on the Rostra, there was a general rush to throw him down. The
Forum was in theory still a sacred spot, where the carrying of arms was
forbidden; but the new age had forgotten such obsolete superstitions. The
guards issued out of the temples with drawn swords. The people were
desperate and determined. Hundreds were killed on both sides; Quintus
Cicero, who was present for his brother, narrowly escaping with life. The
Tiber, Cicero says--perhaps with some exaggeration--was covered with
floating bodies; the sewers were choked; the bloody area of the Forum had
to be washed with sponges. Such a day had not been seen in Rome since the
fight between Cinna and Octavius.[5] The mob remained masters of the
field, and Cicero's cause had to wait for better times. Milo had been
active in the combat, and Clodius led his victorious bands to Milo's house
to destroy it. Milo brought an action against him for violence; but
Clodius was charmed even against forms of law. There was no censor as yet
chosen, and without a censor the praetors pretended that they could not
entertain the prosecution. Finding law powerless, Milo imitated his
antagonist. He, too, had his band of gladiators about him; and the streets
of the Capital were entertained daily by fights between the factions of
Clodius and Milo. The Commonwealth of the Scipios, the laws and
institutions of the mistress of the civilized world, had become the
football of ruffians. Time and reflection brought some repentance at last.
Toward the summer "the cause of order" rallied. The consuls and Pompey
exerted themselves to reconcile the more respectable citizens to Cicero's
return; and, with the ground better prepared, the attempt was renewed with
more success. In July the recall was again proposed in the Senate, and
Clodius was alone in opposing it. When it was laid before the Assembly,
Clodius made another effort; but voters had been brought up from other
parts of Italy who outnumbered the city rabble; Milo and his gladiators
were in force to prevent another burst of violence; and the great orator
and statesman was given back to his country. Sixteen months he had been
lamenting himself in Greece, bewailing his personal ill-treatment. He was
the single object of his own reflections. In his own most sincere
convictions he was the centre on which the destinies of Rome revolved. He
landed at Brindisi on the 5th of August. His pardon had not yet been
decreed, though he knew that it was coming. The happy news arrived in a
day or two, and he set out in triumph for Rome. The citizens of Brindisi
paid him their compliments; deputations came to congratulate from all
parts of Italy. Outside the city every man of note of all the orders, save
a few of his declared enemies, were waiting to receive him. The roofs and
steps of the temples were thronged with spectators. Crowds attended him to
the Capitol, where he went to pour out his gratitude to the gods, and
welcomed him home with shouts of applause.

Had he been wise he would have seen that the rejoicing was from the lips
outward; that fine words were not gold; that Rome and its factions were
just where he had left them, or had descended one step lower. But Cicero
was credulous of flattery when it echoed his own opinions about himself.
The citizens, he persuaded himself, were penitent for their ingratitude to
the most illustrious of their countrymen. The acclamations filled him with
the delighted belief that he was to resume his place at the head of the
State; and, as he could not forgive his disgrace, his first object in the
midst of his triumph was to revenge himself on those who had caused it.
Speeches of acknowledgment he had naturally to make both to the Senate and
the Assembly. In addressing the people he was moderately prudent; he
glanced at the treachery of his friends, but he did not make too much of
it. He praised his own good qualities, but not extravagantly. He described
Pompey as "the wisest, best, and greatest of all men that had been, were,
or ever would be." Himself he compared to Marius returning also from
undeserved exile, and he delicately spoke in honor of a name most dear to
the Roman plebs, But he, he said, unlike Marius, had no enemies but the
enemies of his country. He had no retaliation to demand for his own
wrongs. If he punished bad citizens, it would be by doing well himself; if
he punished false friends, it would be by never again trusting them. His
first and his last object would be to show his gratitude to his fellow-
citizens.[6]

Such language was rational and moderate. He understood his audience, and
he kept his tongue under a bridle. But his heart was burning in him; and
what he could not say in the Forum he thought he might venture on with
impunity in the Senate, which might be called his own dunghill. His chief
wrath was at the late consuls. They were both powerful men. Gabinius was
Pompey's chief supporter. Calpurnius Piso was Caesar's father-in-law. Both
had been named to the government of important provinces; and, if authority
was not to be brought into contempt, they deserved at least a show of
outward respect. Cicero lived to desire their friendship, to affect a
value for them, and to regret his violence; but they had consented to his
exile; and careless of decency, and oblivious of the chances of the
future, he used his opportunity to burst out upon them in language in
which the foulest ruffian in the streets would have scarcely spoken of the
first magistrates of the Republic. Piso and Gabinius, he said, were
thieves, not consuls. They had been friends of Catiline, and had been
enemies to himself, because he had baffled the conspiracy. Piso could not
pardon the death of Cethegus. Gabinius regretted in Catiline himself the
loss of his lover.[7] Gabinius, he said, had been licentious in his
youth; he had ruined his fortune; he had supplied his extravagance by
pimping; and had escaped his creditors only by becoming tribune. "Behold
him," Cicero said, "as he appeared when consul at a meeting called by the
arch-thief Clodius, full of wine, and sleep, and fornication, his hair
moist, his eyes heavy, his cheeks flaccid, and declaring, with a voice
thick with drink, that he disapproved of putting citizens to death without
trial." [8] As to Piso, his best recommendation was a cunning gravity of
demeanor, concealing mere vacuity. Piso knew nothing--neither law, nor
rhetoric, nor war, nor his fellow-men. "His face was the face of some
half-human brute." "He was like a negro, a thing [_negotium_] without
sense or savor, a Cappadocian picked out of a drove in the
slave-market." [9]

Cicero was not taking the best means to regain his influence in the Senate
by stooping to vulgar brutality. He cannot be excused by the manners of
the age; his violence was the violence of a fluent orator whose temper ran
away with him, and who never resisted the temptation to insult an
opponent. It did not answer with him; he thought he was to be chief of the
Senate, and the most honored person in the State again; he found that he
had been allowed to return only to be surrounded by mosquitoes whose
delight was to sting him, while the Senate listened with indifference or
secret amusement. He had been promised the restoration of his property;
but he had a suit to prosecute before he could get it. Clodius had thought
to make sure of his Roman palace by dedicating it to "Liberty." Cicero
challenged the consecration. It was referred to the College of Priests,
and the College returned a judgment in Cicero's favor. The Senate voted
for the restoration. They voted sums for the rebuilding both of the palace
on the Palatine Hill and of the other villas, at the public expense. But
the grant in Cicero's opinion was a stingy one. He saw too painfully that
those "who had clipped his wings did not mean them to grow again." [10]
Milo and his gladiators were not sufficient support, and if he meant to
recover his old power he found that he must look for stronger allies.
Pompey had not used him well; Pompey had promised to defend him from
Clodius, and Pompey had left him to his fate. But by going with Pompey he
could at least gall the Senate. An opportunity offered, and he caught at
it. There was a corn famine in Rome. Clodius had promised the people cheap
bread, but there was no bread to be had. The hungry mob howled about the
senate-house, threatening fire and massacre. The great capitalists and
contractors were believed to be at their old work. There was a cry, as in
the "pirate" days, for some strong man to see to them and their misdoings.
Pompey was needed again. He had been too much forgotten, and with Cicero's
help a decree was carried which gave Pompey control over the whole corn
trade of the Empire for five years.

This was something, and Pompey was gratified; but without an army Pompey
could do little against the roughs in the streets, and Cicero's house
became the next battle-ground. The Senate had voted it to its owner again,
and the masons and carpenters were set to work; but the sovereign people
had not been consulted. Clodius was now but a private citizen; but private
citizens might resist sacrilege if the magistrates forgot their duty. He
marched to the Palatine with his gang. He drove out the workmen, broke
down the walls, and wrecked the adjoining house, which belonged to
Cicero's brother Quintus. The next day he set on Cicero himself in the Via
Sacra, and nearly murdered him, and he afterward tried to burn the house
of Milo. Consuls and tribunes did not interfere. They were, perhaps,
frightened. The Senate professed regret, and it was proposed to prosecute
Clodius; but his friends were too strong, and it could not be done. Could
Cicero have wrung his neck, as he had wrung the necks of Lentulus and
Cethegus, Rome and he would have had a good deliverance. Failing this, he
might wisely have waited for the law, which in time must have helped him.
But he let himself down to Clodius's level. He railed at him in the Curia
as he had railed at Gabinius and Piso. He ran over his history; he taunted
him with incest with his sister, and with filthy relations with vulgar
millionaires. He accused him of having sold himself to Catiline, of
having forged wills, murdered the heirs of estates and stolen their
property, of having murdered officers of the treasury and seized the
public money, of having outraged gods and men, decency, equity, and law;
of having suffered every abomination and committed every crime of which
human nature was capable. So Cicero spoke in Clodius's own hearing and in
the hearing of his friends. It never occurred to him that if half these
crimes could be proved, a commonwealth in which such a monster could rise
to consequence was not a commonwealth at all, but a frightful mockery
which he and every honest man were called on to abhor. Instead of scolding
and flinging impotent filth, he should have withdrawn out of public life
when he could only remain in it among such companions, or should have
attached himself with all his soul to those who had will and power to mend
it.

Clodius was at this moment the popular candidate for the aedileship, the
second step on the road to the consulship. He was the favorite of the mob.
He was supported by his brother Appius Claudius, the praetor, and the
_clientele_ of the great Claudian family; and Cicero's denunciations
of him had not affected in the least his chances of success. If Clodius
was to be defeated, other means were needed than a statement in the Senate
that the aspirant to public honors was a wretch unfit to live. The
election was fixed for the 18th of November, and was to be held in the
Campus Martius. Milo and his gladiators took possession of the polling-
place in the night, and the votes could not be taken. The Assembly met the
next day in the Forum, but was broken up by violence, and Clodius had
still to wait. The political witch-dance was at its height and Cicero was
in his glory. "The elections," he wrote to Atticus, "will not, I think, be
held; and Clodius will be prosecuted by Milo unless he is first killed.
Milo will kill him if he falls in with him. He is not afraid to do it, and
he says openly that he will do it. He is not frightened at the misfortune
which fell on me. He is not the man to listen to traitorous friends or to
trust indolent patricians." [11]

With recovered spirits the Senate began again to attack the laws of Caesar
and Clodius as irregular; but they were met with the difficulty which
Clodius had provided. Cato had come back from Cyprus, delighted with his
exploit and with himself, and bringing a ship-load of money with him for
the public treasury. If the laws were invalidated by the disregard of
Bibulus and the signs of the sky, then the Cyprus mission had been invalid
also, and Cato's fine performance void. Caesar's grand victories, the news
of which was now coming in, made it inopportune to press the matter
farther; and just then another subject rose, on which the optimates ran
off like hounds upon a fresh scent.

Ptolemy of Cyprus had been disposed of. Ptolemy Auletes had been preserved
on the throne of Egypt by subsidies to the chiefs of the Senate. But his
subjects had been hardly taxed to raise the money. The Cyprus affair had
further exasperated them, and when Ptolemy laid on fresh impositions the
Alexandrians mutinied and drove him out. His misfortunes being due to his
friends at Rome, he came thither to beg the Romans to replace him. The
Senate agreed unanimously that he must be restored to his throne. But then
the question rose, who should be the happy person who was to be the
instrument of his reinstatement? Alexandria was rich. An enormous fine
could be exacted for the rebellion, besides what might be demanded from
Ptolemy's gratitude. No prize so splendid had yet been offered to Roman
avarice, and the patricians quarrelled over it like jackals over a bone.
Lentulus Spinther, the late consul, was now Governor of Cilicia; Gabinius
was Governor of Syria; and each of these had their advocates. Cicero and
the respectable conservatives were for Spinther; Pompey was for Gabinius.
Others wished Pompey himself to go; others wished for Crassus.

[Sidenote: B.C. 56.]
Meanwhile, the poor Egyptians themselves claimed a right to be heard in
protest against the reimposition upon them of a sovereign who had made
himself abhorred. Why was Ptolemy to be forced on them? A hundred of the
principal Alexandrians came to Italy with a remonstrance; and had they
brought money with them they might have had a respectful hearing. But they
had brought none or not enough, and Ptolemy, secure of his patrons'
support, hired a party of banditti, who set on the deputation when it
landed, and killed the greater part of its members. Dion, the leader of
the embassy, escaped for a time. There was still a small party among the
aristocracy (Cato and Cato's followers) who had a conscience in such
things; and Favonius, one of them, took up Dion's cause. Envoys and allied
sovereigns or provinces, he said, were continually being murdered. Noble
lords received hush-money, and there had been no inquiry. Such things
happened too often, and ought to be stopped. The Senate voted decently to
send for Dion and examine him. But Favonius was privately laughed at as
"Cato's ape;" the unfortunate Dion was made away with, and Pompey took
Ptolemy into his own house and openly entertained him there. Pompey would
himself perhaps have undertaken the restoration, but the Senate was
jealous. His own future was growing uncertain; and eventually, without
asking for a consent which the Senate would have refused to give, he sent
his guest to Syria with a charge to his friend Gabinius to take him back
on his own responsibility.[12]

The killing of envoys and the taking of hush-money by senators were, as
Favonius had said, too common to attract much notice; but the affair of
Ptolemy, like that of Jugurtha, had obtained an infamous notoriety. The
Senate was execrated. Pompey himself fell in public esteem. His
overseership of the granaries had as yet brought in no corn. He had been
too busy over the Egyptian matter to attend to it. Clearly enough there
would now have been a revolution in Rome, but for the physical force of
the upper classes with their bands of slaves and clients.

The year of Milo's tribunate being over, Clodius was chosen aedile without
further trouble; and, instead of being the victim of a prosecution, he at
once impeached Milo for the interruption of the Comitia on the 18th of
November. Milo appeared to answer on the 2d of February; but there was
another riot, and the meeting was broken up. On the 6th the court was
again held. The crowd was enormous. Cicero happily has left a minute
account of the scene. The people were starving, the corn question was
pressing. Milo presented himself, and Pompey came forward on the Rostra to
speak. He was received with howls and curses from Clodius's hired
ruffians, and his voice could not be heard for the noise. Pompey held on
undaunted, and commanded occasional silence by the weight of his presence.
Clodius rose when Pompey had done, and rival yells went up from the
Milonians. Yells were not enough; filthy verses were sung in chorus about
Clodius and Clodia, ribald bestiality, delightful to the ears of "Tully."
Clodius, pale with anger, called out, "Who is murdering the people with
famine?" A thousand throats answered, "Pompey!" "Who wants to go to
Alexandria?" "Pompey!" they shouted again. "And whom do you want to go?"
"Crassus!" they cried. Passion had risen too high for words. The Clodians
began to spit on the Milonians. The Milonians drew swords and cut the
heads of the Clodians. The working men, being unarmed, got the worst of
the conflict; and Clodius was flung from the Rostra. The Senate was
summoned to call Pompey to account. Cicero went off home, wishing to
defend Pompey, but wishing also not to offend the "good" party, who were
clamorous against him. That evening nothing could be done. Two days after
the Senate met again; Cato abused Pompey, and praised Cicero much against
Cicero's will, who was anxious to stand well with Pompey. Pompey accused
Cato and Crassus of a conspiracy to murder him. In fact, as Cicero said,
Pompey had just then no friend in any party. The mob was estranged from
him, the noble lords hated him, the Senate did not like him, the patrician
youth insulted him, and he was driven to bring up friends from the country
to protect his life. All sides were mustering their forces in view of an
impending fight.[13]

It would be wasted labor to trace minutely the particulars of so miserable
a scene, or the motives of the principal actors in it--Pompey, bound to
Caesar by engagement and conviction, yet jealous of his growing fame,
without political conviction of his own, and only conscious that his
weight in the State no longer corresponded to his own estimate of his
merits--Clodius at the head of the starving mob, representing mere
anarchy, and nourishing an implacable hate against Cicero--Cicero, anxious
for his own safety, knowing now that he had made enemies of half the
Senate, watching how the balance of factions would go, and dimly conscious
that the sword would have to decide it, clinging, therefore, to Pompey,
whose military abilities his civilian ignorance considered supereminent--
Cato, a virtuous fanatic, narrow, passionate, with a vein of vanity,
regarding all ways as wrong but his own, and thinking all men who would
not walk as he prescribed wicked as well as mistaken--the rest of the
aristocracy scuffling for the plunder of Egypt, or engaged in other
enterprises not more creditable--the streets given over to the factions--
the elections the alternate prize of bribery or violence, and consulates
and praetorships falling to men more than half of whom, if Cicero can be
but moderately believed, deserved to be crucified. Cicero's main affection
was for Titus Annius Milo, to whom he clung as a woman will cling to a man
whose strength she hopes will support her weakness. Milo, at least, would
revenge his wrongs upon Clodius. Clodius, Cicero said even in the Senate,
was Milo's predestined victim.[14] Titus Annius knew how an armed citizen
who burnt temples and honest men's houses ought to be dealt with. Titus
Annius was born to extinguish that pest of the Commonwealth.[15]

Still smarting over his exile, Cicero went one day with Milo and his
gladiators to the Capitol when Clodius was absent, and carried off the
brass tablet on which the decree of his exile had been engraved. It was
some solace to his poor vanity to destroy the record of his misfortune.
But it was in vain. All was going wrong. Caesar's growing glories came
thick to trouble his peace. He, after all, then, was not to be the
greatest man in Rome. How would these splendid successes affect parties?
How would they affect Pompey? How would, they affect the Senate? What
should he do himself?

The Senate distrusted him; the people distrusted him. In his perplexity he
tried to rouse the aristocracy to a sense of their danger, and hinted that
his was the name which yet might save them.

Sextius, who had been a tribune with Milo in the past year, was under
prosecution for one of the innumerable acts of violence which had
disgraced the city. Cicero defended him, and spoke at length on the state
of affairs as he wished the world to believe that he regarded it.

"In the Commonwealth," he said, "there have always been two parties--the
populares and the optimates. The populares say and do what will please the
mob. The optimates say and do what will please the best men. And who are
the best men? They are of all ranks and infinite in number--senators,
municipals, farmers, men of business, even libertini. The type is
distinct. They are the well-to-do, the sound, the honest, who do no wrong
to any man. The object at which they aim is quiet with honor.
[16] They are the conservatives of the State. Religion and good
government, the Senate's authority, the laws and customs of our ancestors,
public faith, integrity, sound administration--these are the principles on
which they rest, and these they will maintain with their lives. Their path
is perilous. The foes of the State are stronger than its defenders; they
are bold and desperate, and go with a will to the work of destruction;
while the good, I know not why, are languid, and will not rouse themselves
unless compelled. They would have quiet without honor, and so lose both
quiet and honor. Some are triflers, some are timid, only a few stand firm.
But it is not now as it was in the days of the Gracchi. There have been
great reforms. The people are conservative at heart; the demagogues cannot
rouse them, and are forced to pack the Assembly with hired gangs. Take
away these gangs, stop corruption at the elections, and we shall be all of
one mind. The people will be on our side. The citizens of Rome are not
populares. They hate the populares, and prefer honorable men. How did they
weep in the theatres where they heard the news that I was exiled! How did
they cheer my name! 'Tully, the preserver of our liberties!' was repeated
a thousand times. Attend to me," he said, turning paternally to the high-
born youths who were listening to him, "attend to me when I bid you walk
in the ways of your forefathers. Would you have praise and honor, would
you have the esteem of the wise and good, value the constitution under
which you live. Our ancestors, impatient of kings, appointed annual
magistrates, and for the administration they nominated a Senate chosen
from the whole people into which the road is open for the poorest
citizen." [17]

So Cicero, trying to persuade others, and perhaps half persuading himself,
that all might yet be well, and that the Roman Constitution would roll on
upon its old lines in the face of the scandal of Ptolemy and the greater
scandals of Clodius and Milo.

Cicero might make speeches; but events followed their inexorable course.
The patricians had forgotten nothing and had learnt nothing. The Senate
had voted thanksgivings for Caesar's victories; but in their hearts they
hated him more for them, because they feared him more. Milo and his
gladiators gave them courage. The bitterest of the aristocrats, Domitius
Ahenobarbus, Cato's brother-in-law and praetor for the year, was a
candidate for the consulship. His enormous wealth made his success almost
certain, and he announced in the Senate that he meant to recall Caesar and
repeal his laws. In April a motion was introduced in the Senate to revise
Caesar's land act. Suspicions had gone abroad that Cicero believed
Caesar's star to be in the ascendant, and that he was again wavering. To
clear himself he spoke as passionately as Domitius could himself have
wished, and declared that he honored more the resistance of Bibulus than
all the triumphs in the world. It was time to come to an end with these
gentlemen. Pompey was deeply committed to Caesar's agrarian law, for it
had been passed primarily to provide for his own disbanded soldiers. He
was the only man in Rome who retained any real authority; and touched, as
for a moment he might have been, with jealousy, he felt that honor, duty,
every principle of prudence or patriotism, required him at so perilous a
crisis to give Caesar his firm support. Clodius was made in some way to
understand that, if he intended to retain his influence, he must conform
to the wishes of the army. His brother, Appius, crossed the Alps to see
Caesar himself; and Caesar, after the troops were in their winter
quarters, came over to the north of Italy. Here an interview was arranged
between the chiefs of the popular party. The place of meeting was Lucca,
on the frontier of Caesar's province. Pompey, who had gone upon a tour
along the coast and through the Mediterranean islands on his corn
business, attended without concealment or mystery. Crassus was present,
and more than a hundred senators. The talking power of the State was in
Rome. The practical and real power was in the Lucca conference. Pompey,
Caesar, and Crassus were irresistible when heartily united, and a complete
scheme was arranged between them for the government of the Empire. There
was to be no Domitius Ahenobarbus for a consul, or aristocratic _coups
d'etat_. Pompey and Crassus were to be consuls for the ensuing year.
The consulship over, Pompey was to have Spain for a province for five
years, with an adequate army. Crassus, who was ambitious also of military
distinction, was to have Syria. Caesar's command in Gaul was to be
extended for five years further in addition to his present term. The
consent of the Assembly was to be secured, if difficulty arose, by the
votes of the army. The elections being in the winter, Caesar's soldiers
were to be allowed to go to Rome on furlough.

In a personal interview Caesar easily asserted his ascendency. Pompey
allowed himself to be guided, and the arrangement was probably dictated by
Caesar's own prudence. He did not mean to leave Gaul half conquered, to
see his work undone, and himself made into a plaything by men who had
incited Ariovistus to destroy him. The senators who were present at Lucca
implied by their co-operation that they too were weary of anarchy, and
would sustain the army in a remodelling of the State if milder measures
failed.

Thus, for the moment, Domitius and Cato were baffled. Domitius was not to
be consul. Caesar was not to be recalled, or his laws repealed. There was
no hope for them or for the reaction, till Pompey and Caesar could be
divided; and their alliance was closer now than ever. The aristocratic
party could but chafe in impotent rage. The effect on Cicero was curious.
He had expected that the conservative movement would succeed, and he had
humiliated himself before the Senate, in the idle hope of winning back
their favor. The conference at Lucca opened his eyes. For a time at least
he perceived that Caesar's was the winning side, and he excused himself
for going over to it by laying the blame on the Senate's folly and
ingratitude to himself. Some private correspondence preceded his change of
sides. He consulted Atticus, and had received characteristic and cautious
advice from him. He described in reply his internal struggles, the
resolution at which he had arrived, and the conclusion which he had formed
upon his own past conduct.

"I am chewing what I have to swallow," he said. "Recantation does not seem
very creditable; but adieu to straightforward, honest counsels. You would
not believe the perfidy of these chiefs; as they wish to be, and what they
might be if they had any faith in them. I had felt, I had known, that I
was being led on by them, and then deserted and cast off; and yet I
thought of making common cause with them. They were the same which they
had always been. You made me see the truth at last. You will say you
warned me. You advised what I should do, and you told me not to write to
Caesar. By Hercules! I wished to put myself in a position where I should
be obliged to enter into this new coalition, and where it would not be
possible for me, even if I desired it, to go with those who ought to pity
me, and, instead of pity, give me grudging and envy. I have been moderate
in what I have written. I shall be more full if Caesar meets me
graciously; and then those gentlemen who are so jealous that I should have
a decent house to live in will make a wry face.... Enough of this. Since
those who have no power will not be my friends, I must endeavor to make
friends with those who have. You will say you wished this long ago. I know
that you wished it, and that I have been a mere ass;[18] but it is time
for me to be loved by myself, since I can get no love from them." [19]

Pompey, after leaving Lucca, sent Cicero a message, through his brother,
complaining of his speech on the land act, but assuring him of his own and
Caesar's friendship if he would now be true to them. In an apologetic
letter to Lentulus Spinther, Cicero explained and justified what he meant
to do.

"Pompey," he said, "did not let me know that he was offended. He went off
to Sardinia, and on his way saw Caesar at Lucca. Caesar was angry with me;
he had seen Crassus, and Crassus had prejudiced him. Pompey, too, was
himself displeased. He met my brother a few days after, and told him to
use his influence with me. He reminded him of his exertions in my behalf;
he swore that those exertions had been made with Caesar's consent, and he
begged particularly that, if I could not support Caesar, I would not go
against him. I reflected. I debated the matter as if with the
Commonwealth. I had suffered much and done much for the Commonwealth. I
had now to think of myself. I had been a good citizen; I must now be a
good man. Expressions came round to me that had been used by certain
persons whom even you do not like. They were delighted to think that I had
offended Pompey, and had made Caesar my mortal enemy. This was annoying
enough. But the same persons embraced and kissed even in my presence my
worst foe--the foe of law, order, peace, country, and every good man
[20].... They meant to irritate me, but I had not spirit to be angry. I
surveyed my situation. I cast up my accounts; and I came to a conclusion,
which was briefly this. If the State was in the hands of bad men, as in my
time I have known it to be, I would not join them though they loaded me
with favors; but when the first person in the Commonwealth was Pompey,
whose services had been so eminent, whose advancement I had myself
furthered, and who stood by me in my difficulties, I was not inconsistent
if I modified some of my opinions, and conformed to the wishes of one who
has deserved so well of me. If I went with Pompey, I must go with Caesar
too; and here the old friendship came to bear between Caesar, my brother,
and myself, as well as Caesar's kindness to me, of which I had seen
evidence in word and deed.... Public interest, too, moved me. A quarrel
with these men would be most inexpedient, especially after what Caesar has
done.... If the persons who assisted in bringing me back had been my
friends afterward, they would have recovered their power when they had me
to help them. The 'good' had gained heart when you were consul. Pompey was
then won to the 'good' cause. Even Caesar, after being decorated by the
Senate for his victories, might have been brought to a better judgment,
and wicked citizens would have had no opening to make disturbances. But
what happened? These very men protected Clodius, who cared no more for the
Bona Dea than for the Three Sisters. They allowed my monument to be
engraved with a hostile record....[21] The good party are not as you left
them. Those who ought to have been staunch have fallen away. You see it in
their faces. You see it in the words and votes of those whom we called
'optimates;' so that wise citizens, one of whom I wish to be and to be
thought, must change their course. 'Persuade your countrymen, if you can,'
said Plato; 'but use no violence.' Plato found that he could no longer
persuade the Athenians, and therefore he withdrew from public life. Advice
could not move them, and he held force to be unlawful. My case was
different. I was not called on to undertake public responsibilities. I was
content to further my own interests, and to defend honest men's causes.
Caesar's goodness to me and to my brother would have bound me to him
whatever had been his fortunes. Now after so much glory and victory I
should speak nobly of him though I owed him nothing." [22]

Happy it would have been for Cicero, and happy for Rome, had he persevered
in the course which he now seemed really to have chosen. Cicero and Caesar
united might have restored the authority of the laws, punished corruption
and misgovernment, made their country the mother as well as the mistress
of the world; and the Republic, modified to suit the change of times,
might have survived for many generations. But under such a modification,
Cicero would have no longer been the first person in the Commonwealth. The
talkers would have ceased to rule, and Cicero was a talker only. He could
not bear to be subordinate. He was persuaded that he, and not Caesar, was
the world's real great man; and so he held on, leaning now to one faction
and now to another, waiting for the chance which was to put him at last in
his true place. For the moment, however, he saved himself from the
degradation into which the Senate precipitated itself. The arrangements at
Lucca were the work of the army. The conservative majority refused to let
the army dictate to them. Domitius intended still to be consul, let the
army say what it pleased. Pompey and Crassus returned to Rome for the
elections; the consuls for the year, Marcellinus and Philip, declined to
take their names. The consuls and the Senate appealed to the Assembly, the
Senate marching into the Forum in state, as if calling on the genius of
the nation to defend the outraged constitution. In vain. The people would
not listen. The consuls were groaned down. No genius of Rome presided in
those meetings, but the genius of revolution in the person of Clodius. The
senators were driven back into the Curia, and Clodius followed them there.
The officers forbade his entrance. Furious young aristocrats flew upon
him, seized him, and would have murdered him in their rage. Clodius
shrieked for help. His rascal followers rushed in with lighted torches,
swearing to burn house and Senate if a hair of Clodius's head were hurt.
They bore their idol off in triumph; and the wretched senators sat gazing
at each other, or storming at Pompey, and inquiring scornfully if he and
Crassus intended to appoint themselves consuls. Pompey answered that they
had no desire for office, but anarchy must be brought to an end.

Still the consuls of the year stubbornly refused to take the names of the
Lucca nominees. The year ran out, and no election had been held. In such a
difficulty, the constitution had provided for the appointment of an
_Interrex_ till fresh consuls could be chosen. Pompey and Crassus
were then nominated, with a foregone conclusion. Domitius still persisted
in standing; and, had it been safe to try the usual methods, the
patricians would have occupied the voting-places as before with their
retinues, and returned him by force. But young Publius Crassus was in Rome
with thousands of Caesar's soldiers, who had come up to vote from the
north of Italy. With these it was not safe to venture on a conflict, and
the consulships fell as the Lucca conference had ordered.

[Sidenote: B.C. 55.]
The consent of the Assembly to the other arrangements remained to be
obtained. Caesar was to have five additional years in Gaul; Pompey and
Crassus were to have Spain and Syria, also for five years each, as soon as
their year of office should be over. The defenders of the constitution
fought to the last. Cato foamed on the Rostra. When the two hours allowed
him to speak were expired, he refused to sit down, and was removed by a
guard. The meeting was adjourned to the next day. Publius Gallus, another
irreconcilable, passed the night in the senate-house, that he might be in
his place at dawn. Cato and Favonius were again at their posts. The
familiar cry was raised that the signs of the sky were unfavorable. The
excuse had ceased to be legal. The tribunes ordered the voting to go
forward. The last resource was then tried. A riot began, but to no
purpose. The aristocrats and their clients were beaten back, and the
several commands were ratified. As the people were dispersing, their
opponents rallied back, filled the Forum, and were voting Caesar's recall,
when Pompey came on them and swept them out. Gallus was carried off
covered with blood; and, to prevent further question, the vote for Caesar
was taken a second time.

The immediate future was thus assured. Time had been obtained for the
completion of the work in Gaul. Pompey dedicated a new theatre, and
delighted the mob with games and races. Five hundred lions were consumed
in five days of combat. As a special novelty eighteen elephants were made
to fight with soldiers; and, as a yet more extraordinary phenomenon, the
sanguinary Roman spectators showed signs of compunction at their
sufferings. The poor beasts were quiet and harmless. When wounded with the
lances, they turned away, threw up their trunks, and trotted round the
circus, crying, as if in protest against wanton cruelty. The story went
that they were half human; that they had been seduced on board the African
transports by a promise that they should not be ill-used, and they were
supposed to be appealing to the gods.[23]Cicero alludes to the scene in
a letter to one of his friends. Mentioning Pompey's exhibitions with
evident contempt, he adds: "There remained the hunts, which lasted five
days. All say that they were very fine. But what pleasure can a sensible
person find in seeing a clumsy performer torn by a wild beast, or a noble
animal pierced with a hunting-spear? The last day was given to the
elephants; not interesting to me, however delightful to the rabble. A
certain pity was felt for them, as if the elephants had some affinity with
man." [24]

[1] _ To Atticus_, ii. 16.

[2] "Conservatores Reipublicae."--_Pro Sextio_.

[3] Mommsen.

[4] "Omnia sunt mea culpa commissa, qui ab his me amari putabam qui
    invidebant: eos non sequebar qui petebant."--_Ad Familiares_,
    xiv. 1. "Nullum est meum peccatum nisi quod iis credidi a quibus
    nefas putabam esse me decipi.... Intimus proximus familiarissimus
    quisque aut sibi pertimuit aut mihi invidit."--_Ad Quintum
    Fratrem_, i. 4.

[5] "Meministis tum, judices, corporibus civium Tiberim compleri, cloacas
    referciri, e foro spongiis effingi sanguinem.... Caedem tantam, tantos
    acervos corporum extruetos, nisi forte illo Cinnano atque Octaviano
    die, quis unquam in foro vidit?"--_Oratio prov P. Sextio_,
    xxxv. 36.

[6] _Ad Quirites post Reditum_.

[7] "Ejus vir Catilina."

[8] "Cum in Circo Flaminio non a tribuno plebis consul in concionem sed a
    latrone archipirata productus esset, primum processit qua auctoritate
    vir. Vini, somni, stupri plenus, madenti coma, gravibus oculis,
    fluentibus buccis, pressa voce et temulenta, quod in cives indemnatos
    esset animadversum, id sibi dixit gravis auctor vehementissime
    displicere."--_Post Reditum in Senatu_, 6.

[9] Cicero could never leave Gabinius and Piso alone. Again and again he
    returned upon them railing like a fishwife. In his oration for Sextius
    he scoffed at Gabinius's pomatum and curled hair, and taunted him with
    unmentionable sins; but he specially entertained himself with his
    description of Piso:

    "For Piso!" he said: "O gods, how unwashed, how stern he looked--a
    pillar of antiquity, like one of the old bearded consuls; his dress
    plain plebeian purple, his hair tangled, his brow a very pledge for
    the Commonwealth! Such solemnity in his eye, such wrinkling of his
    forehead, that you would have said the State was resting on his head
    like the sky on Atlas. Here we thought we had a refuge. Here was the
    man to oppose the filth of Gabinius; his very face would be enough.
    People congratulated us on having one friend to save us from the
    tribune. Alas! I was deceived," etc. etc.

    Piso afterward called Cicero to account in the Senate, and brought out
    a still more choice explosion of invectives. Beast, filth, polluted
    monster, and such like, were the lightest of the names which Cicero
    hurled back at one of the oldest members of the Roman aristocracy. A
    single specimen may serve to illustrate the cataract of nastiness
    which he poured alike on Piso and Clodius and Gabinius: "When all the
    good were hiding themselves in tears," he said to Piso, "when the
    temples were groaning and the very houses in the city were mourning
    (over my exile), you, heartless madman that you are, took up the cause
    of that pernicious animal, that clotted mass of incests and civil
    blood, of villanies intended and impurity of crimes committed[he was
    alluding to Clodius, who was in the Senate probably listening to him].
    Need I speak of your feasting, your laughter, and handshakings--your
    drunken orgies with the filthy companions of your potations? Who in
    those days saw you ever sober, or doing anything that a citizen need
    not be ashamed of? While your colleague's house was sounding with
    songs and cymbals, and he himself was dancing naked at a supper-party
    ["cumque ipse nudus in convivio saltaret,"] you, you coarse glutton,
    with less taste for music, were lying in a stew of Greek boys and wine
    in a feast of the Centaurs and Lapithae, where one cannot say whether
    you drank most, or vomited most, or spilt most."--_In L.
    Pisonem_,10. The manners of the times do not excuse language of
    this kind, for there was probably not another member of the Senate
    who indulged in it. If Cicero was disliked and despised, he had his
    own tongue to thank for it.

[10] _To Atticus_, iv. 2.

[11] _To Atticus_, iv. 3.

[12] For the details of this story see Dion Cassius, lib. xxxix. capp.
    12-16. Compare _Cicero ad Familiares_, lib. i. Epist. 1-2.
    Curious subterranean influences seem to have been at work to save the
    Senate from the infamy of restoring Ptolemy. Verses were discovered in
    the Sibylline Books directing that if an Egyptian king came to Rome as
    a suppliant, he was to be entertained hospitably, but was to have no
    active help. Perhaps Cicero was concerned in this.

[13] _Ad Quintum Fratrem_, ii. 3.

[14] "Tito Annio devota et constituta hostia esse videtur."--_De
    Haruspicum responsis_.

[15] Ibid.

[16] "Otium cum dignitate."

[17] Abridged from the _Oratio pro Sextio_.

[18] "Me germanum asinum fuisse." Perhaps "own brother to an ass" would be
    a more proper rendering.

[19] _To Atticus_, iv. 5.

[20] Clodius.

[21] Here follows much about himself and his own merits.

[22] To Lentulus Spinther, _Ad Familiares_, i. 9. The length of this
    remarkable letter obliges me to give but an imperfect summary of it.
    The letter itself should be studied carefully by those who would
    understand Cicero's conduct.

[23] Dion Cassius.

[24] _Ad Familiares_, vii. 1.




CHAPTER XVI.


[Sidenote: B.C. 56.]
While Caesar was struggling with the Senate for leave to complete the
conquest of Gaul, fresh work was preparing for him there. Young Publius
Crassus, before he went to Italy, had wintered with the seventh legion in
Brittany. The Breton tribes had nominally made their submission, and
Crassus had desired them to supply his commissariat. They had given
hostages for their good behavior, and most of them were ready to obey. The
Veneti, the most important of the coast clans, refused. They induced the
rest to join them. They seized the Roman officers whom Crassus had sent
among them, and they then offered to exchange their prisoners for their
countrymen whom the Romans held in pledge. The legions might be
irresistible on land; but the Veneti believed that their position was
impregnable to an attack on the land side. Their homes were on the Bay of
Quiberon and on the creeks and estuaries between the mouth of the Loire
and Brest. Their villages were built on promontories, cut off at high tide
from the mainland, approachable only by water, and not by water except in
shallow vessels of small draught which could be grounded safely on the
mud. The population were sailors and fishermen. They were ingenious and
industrious, and they carried on a considerable trade in the Bay of Biscay
and in the British Channel. They had ships capable of facing the heavy
seas which rolled in from the Atlantic, flat-bottomed, with high bow and
stern, built solidly of oak, with timbers a foot thick, fastened with
large iron nails. They had iron chains for cables. Their sails--either
because sailcloth was scarce, or because they thought canvas too weak for
the strain of the winter storms--were manufactured out of leather. Such
vessels were unwieldy, but had been found available for voyages even to
Britain. Their crews were accustomed to handle them, and knew all the
rocks and shoals and currents of the intricate and difficult harbors. They
looked on the Romans as mere landsmen, and naturally enough they supposed
that they had as little to fear from an attack by water as from the shore.
At the worst they could take to their ships and find a refuge in the
islands.

Crassus, when he went to Rome, carried the report to Caesar of the revolt
of the Veneti, and Caesar felt that unless they were promptly punished,
all Gaul might be again in flame. They had broken faith. They had
imprisoned Roman officers who had gone on a peaceful mission among them.
It was necessary to teach a people so restless, so hardly conquered, and
so impatient of foreign dominion, that there was no situation which the
Roman arm was unable to reach.

While the Lucca conference was going on, a fleet of Roman galleys was
built by his order in the Loire. Rowers, seamen, and pilots were brought
across from Marseilles. When the season was sufficiently advanced for
active operations, Caesar came himself and rejoined his army. Titus
Labienus was sent with three legions to Treves to check the Germans on the
Rhine, and prevent disturbances among the Belgae. Titurius Sabinus, with
three more, was stationed in Normandy. To Brittany Caesar went in person
to reduce the rebellious Veneti. The weather was too unsettled for his
fleet to be able as yet to join him. Without its help he found the problem
as difficult as the Veneti expected. Each village required a siege; when
it was reduced, the inhabitants took to their boats, and defied him again
in a new position. Many weeks were thus fruitlessly wasted. The fine
weather at length set in. The galleys from the Loire came out, accompanied
by others from Rochelle and the mouth of the Garonne. The command at sea
was given to Decimus Brutus, a cousin of the afterward famous Marcus, a
clever, able, and so far loyal officer.

The Veneti had collected every ship that they or their allies possessed to
defend themselves. They had 220 sail in all--a force, considering its
character, extremely formidable. Their vessels were too strong to be run
down. The galleys carried turrets; but the bows and sterns of the Veneti
were still too lofty to be reached effectively by the Roman javelins. The
Romans had the advantage in speed; but that was all. They too, however,
had their ingenuities. They had studied the construction of the Breton
ships. They had provided sickles with long handles, with which they
proposed to catch the halyards which held the weight of the heavy leather
sails. It was not difficult to do, if, as is probable, the halyards were
made fast, not to the mast, but to the gunwale. Sweeping rapidly alongside
they could easily cut them; the sails would fall, and the vessels would be
unmanageable.

A sea battle of this singular kind was thus fought off the eastern
promontory of the Bay of Quiberon, Caesar and his army looking on from the
shore. The sickles answered well; ship after ship was disabled; the
galleys closed with them, and they were taken by boarding. The Veneti then
tried to retreat; but a calm came on, and they could not move. The fight
lasted from ten in the morning till sunset, when the entire Breton fleet
was taken or sunk.

After this defeat the Veneti gave up the struggle. Their ships were all
gone. Their best men were on board, and had been killed. They had no power
of resistance left. Caesar was constitutionally lenient, and admired
rather than resented a valiant fight for freedom. But the Veneti had been
treacherous. They had laid hands on the sacred persons of Roman
ambassadors, and he considered it expedient on this one occasion to use
severity. The council who had contrived the insurrection were put to
death. The rest of the tribe were treated as the Aduatuci had been, and
were sold into slavery.

Sabinus, meanwhile, had been in difficulties in Normandy. The people there
had risen and killed their chiefs, who tried to keep them quiet; vagabonds
from other parts had joined them, and Sabinus, who wanted enterprise,
allowed the disturbances to become dangerous. He ended them at last,
however, successfully, and Caesar would not allow his caution to be
blamed. During the same months, Publius Crassus had made a brilliant
campaign in Aquitaine. The Aquitani had not long before overthrown two
Roman armies. Determined not to submit to Caesar, they had allied
themselves with the Spaniards of the Pyrenees, and had officers among them
who had been trained by Sertorius. Crassus stormed their camp with a skill
and courage which called out Caesar's highest approbation, and completely
subdued the whole country.

In all France there now remained only a few unimportant tribes on the
coast between Calais and the Scheldt which had not formally submitted. The
summer being nearly over, Caesar contented himself with a hasty survey of
their frontier. The weather broke up earlier than usual, and the troops
were redistributed in their quarters. Again there had been a year of
unbroken success. The Romans were masters of Gaul, and the admirable care
of their commander had preserved the numbers in his legions almost
undiminished. The smallness of the loss with which all these wonders were
accomplished is perhaps the most extraordinary feature of the story. Not
till a year later is there any notice of fresh recruits being brought from
Italy.

The winter which followed brought with it another of the dangerous waves
of German immigration. The powerful Suevi, a nation of warriors who
cultivated no lands, who wore no clothes but a deer or sheep skin, who
lived by hunting and pasture, despised the restraints of stationary life,
and roved at pleasure into their neighbors' territories, were pressing on
the weaker tribes and forcing them down into the Low Countries. The
Belgians, hoping for their help against the Romans, had invited these
tribes over the Rhine; and, untaught by the fate of Ariovistus, they were
crossing over and collecting in enormous numbers above the junction of the
Rhine and the Meuse. Into a half-peopled country, large portions of which
are lying waste, it might be barbarous to forbid an immigration of
harmless and persecuted strangers; but if these Germans were persecuted,
they were certainly not harmless; they had come at the instance of the
party in Gaul which was determined to resist the Roman conquest, and
unless the conquest was to be abandoned, necessity required that the
immigration must be prohibited. When the advance of spring allowed the
troops to move, Caesar called a council of Gallic chiefs. He said nothing
of the information which had reached him respecting their correspondence
with these new invaders, but with his usual swiftness of decision he made
up his mind to act without waiting for disaffection to show itself. He
advanced at once to the Ardennes, where he was met by envoys from the
German camp. They said that they had been expelled from their country, and
had come to Gaul in search of a home; they did not wish to quarrel with
the Romans; if Caesar would protect them and give them lands, they
promised to be useful to him; if he refused their alliance, they declared
that they would defend themselves. They had fled before the Sueves, for
the Sueves were the first nation in the world; the immortal gods were not
a match for the Sueves; but they were afraid of no one else, and Caesar
might choose whether he would have them for friends or foes.

Caesar replied that they must not stay in Gaul. There were no unoccupied
lands in Gaul which could receive so vast a multitude. The Ubii[1] on
their own side of the Rhine were allies of the Romans; the Ubii, he was
willing to undertake, would provide for them; meanwhile they must go back;
he would listen to no other conditions. The envoys departed with their
answer, begging Caesar to advance no farther till he had again heard from
them. This could not be granted. The interval would be employed in
communicating with the Gauls. Caesar pushed on, crossed the Meuse at
Maestricht, and descended the river to Venloo, where he was but twelve
miles distant from the German head-quarters. Again messengers came, asking
for time--time, at least, till they could learn whether the Ubii would
receive them. If the Ubii were favorable, they said that they were ready
to go; but they could not decide without a knowledge of what was to become
of them. They asked for a respite, if only for three days.

Three days meant only leisure to collect their scattered detachments, that
they might make a better fight. Caesar gave them twenty-four hours.

The two armies were so near that their front lines were in sight of each
other. Caesar had given orders to his officers not to meddle with the
Germans. But the Germans, being undisciplined and hot-blooded, were less
easy to be restrained. A large body of them flung themselves on the Roman
advanced guard, and drove it in with considerable loss; seventy-four Roman
knights fell, and two Aquitanian noblemen, brothers, serving under Caesar,
were killed in defending each other.

Caesar was not sorry for an excuse to refuse further parley. The Germans
were now scattered. In a day or two they would be united again. He knew
the effect which would be produced on the restless minds of the Gauls by
the news of a reverse however slight; and if he delayed longer, he feared
that the country might be on fire in his rear. On the morning which
followed the first action, the principal German chiefs appeared to
apologize and to ask for a truce. They had come in of their own accord.
They had not applied for a safe conduct, and war had been begun by their
own people. They were detained as prisoners; and, marching rapidly over
the short space which divided the camps, Caesar flung himself on the
unfortunate people when they were entirely unprepared for the attack.
Their chiefs were gone. They were lying about in confusion beside their
wagons, women and children dispersed among the men; hundreds of thousands
of human creatures, ignorant where to turn for orders, and uncertain
whether to fight or fly. In this condition the legions burst in on them,
furious at what they called the treachery of the previous day, and
merciless in their vengeance. The poor Germans stood bravely defending
themselves as they could; but the sight of their women flying in shrieking
crowds, pursued by the Roman horse, was too much for them, and the whole
host were soon rushing in despairing wreck down the narrowing isthmus
between the Meuse and the Rhine. They came to the junction at last, and
then they could go no further. Multitudes were slaughtered; multitudes
threw themselves into the water and were drowned. Caesar, who was not
given to exaggeration, says that their original number was 430,000. The
only survivors, of whom any clear record remains, were the detachments who
were absent from the battle, and the few chiefs who had come into Caesar's
camp and continued with him at their own request from fear of being
murdered by the Gauls.

This affair was much spoken of at the time, as well it might be. Questions
were raised upon it in the Senate. Cato insisted that Caesar had massacred
a defenceless people in a time of truce, that he had broken the law of
nations, and that he ought to be given up to the Germans. The sweeping off
the earth in such a manner of a quarter of a million human creatures, even
in those unscrupulous times, could not be heard of without a shudder. The
irritation in the Senate can hardly be taken as disinterested. Men who had
intrigued with Ariovistus for Caesar's destruction, needed not to be
credited with feelings of pure humanity when they made the most of the
opportunity. But an opportunity had undoubtedly been offered them. The
rights of war have their limits. No living man in ordinary circumstances
recognized those limits more than Caesar did. No commander was more
habitually merciful in victory. In this case the limits had been
ruthlessly exceeded. The Germans were not indeed defending their own
country; they were the invaders of another; but they were a fine brave
race, overtaken by fate when doing no more than their forefathers had done
for unknown generations. The excuse for their extermination was simply
this: that Caesar had undertaken the conquest of Gaul for the defence of
Italy. A powerful party among the Gauls themselves were content to be
annexed to the Roman Empire. The patriots looked to the Germans to help
them in driving out the Romans. The Germanizing of Gaul would lead with
certainty to fresh invasions of Italy; and it seemed permissible, and even
necessary, to put a stop to these immigrations once for all, and to show
Gauls and Germans equally that they were not to be.

It was not enough to have driven the Germans out of Gaul. Caesar respected
their character. He admired their abstinence from wine, their courage,
their frugal habits, and their pure morality. But their virtues made them
only more dangerous; and he desired to show them that the Roman arm was
long and could reach them even in their own homes. Parties of the late
invaders had returned over the Rhine, and were protected by the Sigambri
in Westphalia. Caesar had demanded their surrender, and the Sigambri had
answered that Roman authority did not reach across the river; if Caesar
forbade Germans to cross into Gaul, the Germans would not allow the Romans
to dictate to them in their own country. The Ubii were growing anxious.
They were threatened by the Sueves for deserting the national cause. They
begged Caesar to show himself among them, though his stay might be but
short, as a proof that he had power and will to protect them; and they
offered him boats and barges to carry his army over. Caesar decided to go,
but to go with more ostentation. The object was to impress the German
imagination; and boats and barges which might not always be obtainable
would, if they seemed essential, diminish the effect. The legions were
skilled workmen, able to turn their hand to anything. He determined to
make a bridge, and he chose Bonn for the site of it. The river was broad,
deep, and rapid. The materials were still standing in the forest; yet in
ten days from the first stroke that was delivered by an axe, a bridge had
been made standing firmly on rows of piles with a road over it forty feet
wide. A strong guard was left at each end. Caesar marched across with the
legions, and from all sides deputations from the astonished people poured
in to beg for peace. The Sigambri had fled to their woods. The Suevi fell
back into the Thuringian forests. He burnt the villages of the Sigambri,
to leave the print of his presence. He paid the Ubii a long visit; and
after remaining eighteen days beyond the river, he considered that his
purpose had been gained, and he returned to Gaul, destroying the bridge
behind him.

It was now about the beginning of August. A few weeks only of possible
fine weather remained. Gaul was quiet, not a tribe was stirring. The
people were stunned by Caesar's extraordinary performances. West of the
channel which washed the shores of the Belgae lay an island where the
enemies of Rome had found shelter, and from which help had been sent to
the rebellious Bretons. Caesar, the most skilful and prudent of generals,
was yet adventurous as a knight-errant. There was still time for a short
expedition into Britain. As yet nothing was known of that country, save
the white cliffs which could be seen from Calais; Roman merchants
occasionally touched there, but they had never ventured into the interior;
they could give no information as to the size of the island, the qualities
of the harbors, the character or habits of the inhabitants. Complete
ignorance of such near neighbors was undesirable and inconvenient; and
Caesar wished to look at them with his own eyes. The fleet which had been
used in the war with the Veneti was sent round into the channel. He
directed Caius Volusenus, an officer whom he could trust, to take a galley
and make a survey of the opposite coast, and he himself followed to
Boulogne, where his vessels were waiting for him. The gathering of the
flotilla and its object had been reported to Britain, and envoys from
various tribes were waiting there with offers of hostages and humble
protestations. Caesar received them graciously, and sent back with them a
Gaul, named Commius, whom he had made chief of the Atrebates, to tell the
people that he was coming over as a friend, and that they had nothing to
fear.

Volusenus returned after five days' absence, having been unable to gather
anything of importance. The ships which had come in were able only to take
across two legions, probably at less than their full complement--or at
most ten thousand men; but for Caesar's present purpose these were
sufficient. Leaving Sabinus and Cotta in charge of the rest of the army,
he sailed on a calm evening, and was off Dover in the morning. The cliffs
were lined with painted warriors, and hung so close over the water that if
he attempted to land there stones and lances could reach the boats from
the edge of the precipice. He called his officers about him while his
fleet collected, and said a few encouraging words to them; he then moved
up the coast with the tide, apparently as far as Walmer or Deal. Here the
beach was open and the water deep near the land. The Britons had followed
by the brow of the cliff, scrambling along with their cars and horses. The
shore was covered with them, and they evidently meant to fight. The
transports anchored where the water was still up to the men's shoulders.
They were encumbered with their arms, and did not like the look of what
was before them. Seeing them hesitate, Caesar sent his armed galleys
filled with archers and crossbow-men to clear the approach; and as the
legionaries still hesitated, an officer who carried the eagle of the 10th
leapt into the sea and bade his comrades follow if they wished to save
their standard. They sprang overboard with a general cheer. The Britons
rode their horses into the waves to meet them; and for a few minutes the
Romans could make no progress. Boats came to their help, which kept back
the most active of their opponents, and once on land they were in their
own element. The Britons galloped off, and Caesar had no cavalry.

A camp was then formed. Some of the ships were left at anchor, others were
brought on shore, and were hauled up to the usual high-water mark. Commius
came in with deputations, and peace was satisfactorily arranged. All went
well till the fourth day, when the full moon brought the spring tide, of
which the Romans had no experience and had not provided for it. Heavy
weather came up along with it. The galleys on the beach were floated off;
the transports at anchor parted their cables; some were driven on shore,
some out into the channel. Caesar was in real anxiety. He had no means of
procuring a second fleet. He had made no preparations for wintering in
Britain. The legions had come light, without tents or baggage, as he meant
to stay no longer than he had done in Germany, two or three weeks at most.
Skill and energy repaired the damage. The vessels which had gone astray
were recovered. Those which were least injured were repaired with the
materials of the rest. Twelve only were lost, the others were made
seaworthy.

The Britons, as Caesar expected, had taken heart at the disaster. They
broke their agreement, and fell upon his outposts. Seeing the small number
of Romans, they collected in force, in the hope that if they could destroy
the first comers no more such unwelcome visitors would ever arrive to
trouble them. A sharp action taught them their mistake; and after many of
the poor creatures had been killed, they brought in hostages, and again
begged for peace. The equinox was now coming on. The weather was again
threatening. Postponing, therefore, further inquiries into the nature of
the British and their country, Caesar used the first favorable
opportunity, and returned, without further adventure, to Boulogne. The
legions were distributed among the Belgae; and Caesar himself, who could
have no rest, hastened over the Alps, to deal with other disturbances
which had broken out in Illyria.

[Sidenote: B.C. 54.]
The bridge over the Rhine and the invasion of a country so remote that it
was scarcely believed to exist, roused the enthusiasm at Rome beyond the
point which it had hitherto reached. The Roman populace was accustomed to
victories, but these were portents like the achievements of the old
demigods. The humbled Senate voted twenty days of thanksgiving; and
faction, controlled by Pompey, was obliged to be silent.

The Illyrian troubles were composed without fighting, and the interval of
winter was spent in preparations for a renewal of the expedition into
Britain on a larger scale. Orders had been left with the officers in
command to prepare as many transports as the time would allow, broader and
lower in the side for greater convenience in loading and unloading. In
April, Caesar returned. He visited the different stations, and he found
that his expert legionaries, working incessantly, had built six hundred
transports and twenty-eight armed galleys. All these were finished and
ready to be launched. He directed that they should collect at Boulogne as
before; and in the interval he paid a visit to the north of Gaul, where
there were rumors of fresh correspondence with the Germans. Danger, if
danger there was, was threatened by the Treveri, a powerful tribe still
unbroken on the Moselle. Caesar, however, had contrived to attach the
leading chiefs to the Roman interest. He found nothing to alarm him, and
once more went down to the sea. In his first venture he had been
embarrassed by want of cavalry. He was by this time personally acquainted
with the most influential of the Gallic nobles. He had requested them to
attend him into Britain with their mounted retinues, both for service in
the field, and that he might keep these restless chiefs under his eye.
Among the rest he had not overlooked the Aeduan prince, Dumnorix, whose
intrigues had brought the Helvetii out of Switzerland, and whose treachery
had created difficulty and nearly disaster in the first campaign. Dumnorix
had not forgotten his ambition. He had affected penitence, and he had been
treated with kindness. He had availed himself of the favor which had been
shown to him to pretend to his countrymen that Caesar had promised him the
chieftainship. He had petitioned earnestly to be excused from accompanying
the expedition, and, Caesar having for this reason probably the more
insisted upon it, he had persuaded the other chiefs that Caesar meant to
destroy them, and that if they went to Britain they would never return.
These whisperings were reported to Caesar. Dumnorix had come to Boulogne
with the rest, and he ordered him to be watched. A long westerly wind had
prevented Caesar from embarking as soon as he had wished. The weather
changed at last, and the troops were ordered on board. Dumnorix slipped
away in the confusion with a party of Aeduan horse, and it was now certain
that he had sinister intentions. The embarkation was suspended. A
detachment of cavalry was sent in pursuit, with directions to bring
Dumnorix back dead or alive. Dumnorix resisted, and was killed.

No disturbance followed on his death. The remaining chiefs were loyal, or
wished to appear loyal, and further delay was unnecessary. Labienus, whom
Caesar thoroughly trusted, remained behind with three legions and two
thousand horse to watch over Gaul; and on a fine summer evening, with a
light air from the south, Caesar sailed at sunset on the 20th of July. He
had five legions with him. He had as many cavalry as he had left with
Labienus. His flotilla, swollen by volunteers, amounted to eight hundred
vessels, small and great. At sunrise they were in midchannel, lying in a
dead calm, with the cliffs of Britain plainly visible on their left hand.
The tide was flowing. Oars were out; the legionaries worked with such
enthusiasm that the transports kept abreast of the war-galleys. At noon
they had reached the beach at Deal, where this time they found no enemy to
oppose their landing; the Britons had been terrified at the multitude of
ships and boats in which the power of Rome was descending on them, and had
fled into the interior. The water was smooth, the disembarkation easy. A
camp was drawn out and intrenched, and six thousand men, with a few
hundred horse, were told off to guard it. The fleet was left riding
quietly at anchor, the pilots ignorant of the meaning of the treacherous
southern air which had been so welcome to them; and Caesar advanced inland
as far as the Stour. The Britons, after an unsuccessful stand to prevent
the Romans from crossing the river, retired into the woods, where they had
made themselves a fortress with felled trees. The weak defence was easily
stormed; the Britons were flying; the Romans were preparing to follow;
when an express came from Deal to tell Caesar that a gale had risen again
and the fleet was lying wrecked upon the shore. A second accident of the
same kind might have seemed an omen of evil, but Caesar did not believe in
omens. The even temperament of his mind was never discomposed, and at each
moment he was able always to decide, and to do, what the moment required.
The army was halted. He rode back himself to the camp, to find that forty
of his vessels only were entirely ruined. The rest were injured, but not
irreparably. They were hauled up within the lines of the camp. He selected
the best mechanics out of the legions; he sent across to Labienus for
more, and directed him to build fresh transports in the yards at Boulogne.
The men worked night and day, and in little more than a week Caesar was
able to rejoin his troops and renew his march.

The object of the invasion had been rather to secure the quiet of Gaul
than the annexation of new subjects and further territory. But it could
not be obtained till the Romans had measured themselves against the
Britons, and had asserted their military superiority. The Britons had
already shown themselves a fearless race, who could not be despised. They
fought bravely from their cars and horses, retreated rapidly when
overmatched, and were found dangerous when pursued. Encouraged by the
report of the disaster to the fleet, Cassibelaunus, chief of the Cassi,
whose head-quarters were at St. Albans, had collected a considerable army
from both sides of the Thames, and was found in strength in Caesar's front
when he again began to move. They attacked his foraging parties. They set
on his flanking detachments. They left their cars, and fought on foot when
they could catch an advantage; and remounted and were swiftly out of the
reach of the heavily armed Roman infantry. The Gaulish horse pursued, but
did not know the country, and suffered more harm than they inflicted. Thus
the British gave Caesar considerable trouble, which he recorded to their
credit. Not a word can be found in his Commentaries to the disparagement
of brave and open adversaries. At length he forced them into a battle,
where their best warriors were killed. The confederacy of tribes dissolved
and never rallied again, and he pursued his march thenceforward with
little molestation. He crossed the Medway, and reached the Thames
seemingly at Sunbury. There was a ford there, but the river was still
deep, the ground was staked, and Cassibelaunus with his own people was on
the other side. The legions, however, paid small attention to
Cassibelaunus; they plunged through with the water at their necks. The
Britons dispersed, driving off their cattle, and watching his march from a
distance. The tribes from the eastern counties made their submission, and
at Caesar's orders supplied him with corn. Caesar marched on to St. Albans
itself, then lying in the midst of forests and marshes, where the cattle,
the Cassi's only wealth, had been collected for security. St. Albans and
the cattle were taken; Cassibelaunus sued for peace; the days were drawing
in; and Caesar, having no intention of wintering in Britain, considered he
had done enough and need go no farther. He returned as he had come. The
Kentish men had attacked the camp in his absence, but had been beaten off
with heavy loss. The Romans had sallied out upon them, killed as many as
they could catch, and taken one of their chiefs. Thenceforward they had
been left in quiet. A nominal tribute, which was never paid, was assigned
to the tribes who had submitted. The fleet was in order, and all was ready
for departure. The only, but unhappily too valuable, booty which they had
carried off consisted of some thousands of prisoners. These, when landed
in Gaul, were disposed of to contractors, to be carried to Italy and sold
as slaves. Two trips were required to transport the increased numbers; but
the passage was accomplished without accident, and the whole army was
again at Boulogne.

Thus ended the expedition into Britain. It had been undertaken rather for
effect than for material advantage; and everything which had been aimed at
had been gained. The Gauls looked no more across the Channel for support
of insurrections; the Romans talked with admiration for a century of the
far land to which Caesar had borne the eagles; and no exploit gave him
more fame with his contemporaries. Nor was it without use to have solved a
geographical problem, and to have discovered with certainty what the
country was, the white cliffs of which were visible from the shores which
were now Roman territory. Caesar during his stay in Britain had acquired a
fairly accurate notion of it. He knew that it was an island, and he knew
its dimensions and shape. He knew that Ireland lay to the west of it, and
Ireland, he had been told, was about half its size. He had heard of the
Isle of Man, and how it was situated. To the extreme north above Britain
he had ascertained that there were other islands, where in winter the sun
scarcely rose above the horizon; and he had observed through accurate
measurement by water-clocks that the midsummer nights in Britain were
shorter than in the south of France and Italy. He had inquired into the
natural products of the country. There were tin mines, he found, in parts
of the island, and iron in small quantities; but copper was imported from
the Continent. The vegetation resembled that of France, save that he saw
no beech and no spruce pine. Of more consequence were the people and the
distribution of them. The Britons of the interior he conceived to be
indigenous. The coast was chiefly occupied by immigrants from Belgium, as
could be traced in the nomenclature of places. The country seemed thickly
inhabited. The flocks and herds were large; and farm buildings were
frequent, resembling those in Gaul. In Kent especially, civilization was
as far advanced as on the opposite continent. The Britons proper from the
interior showed fewer signs of progress. They did not break the ground for
corn; they had no manufactures; they lived on meat and milk, and were
dressed in leather. They dyed their skins blue that they might look more
terrible. They wore their hair long, and had long mustaches. In their
habits they had not risen out of the lowest order of savagery. They had
wives in common, and brothers and sisters, parents and children, lived
together with promiscuous unrestraint. From such a country not much was to
be gained in the way of spoil; nor had much been expected. Since Cicero's
conversion, his brother Quintus had joined Caesar, and was now attending
him as one of his lieutenant-generals. The brothers were in intimate
correspondence. Cicero, though he watched the British expedition with
interest, anticipated that Quintus would bring nothing of value back with
him but slaves; and he warned his friend Atticus, who dealt extensively in
such commodities, that the slaves from Britain would not be found of
superior quality.[2]

[1] Nassau and Darmstadt.

[2] "Britannici belli exitus exspectatur. Constat enim, aditus insulae
    esse munitos mirificis molibus. Etiam illud jam cognitum est, neque
    argenti scrupulum esse ullum in illa insula, neque ullam spem praedae,
    nisi ex mancipiis: ex quibus nullos puto te litteris aut musicis
    eruditos exspectare."--_Ad Atticum_, iv. 16. It does not appear
    what Cicero meant by the "mirificae moles" which guarded the
    approaches to Britain, whether Dover Cliff or the masses of sand
    under water at the Goodwins.




CHAPTER XVII.


The summer had passed off gloriously for the Roman arms. The expedition to
Britain had produced all the effects which Caesar expected from it, and
Gaul was outwardly calm. Below the smooth appearance the elements of
disquiet were silently working, and the winter was about to produce the
most serious disaster and the sharpest trials which Caesar had yet
experienced. On his return from Britain he held a council at Amiens. The
harvest had been bad, and it was found expedient, for their better
provision, to disperse the troops over a broader area than usual. There
were in all eight legions, with part of another to be disposed of, and
they were distributed in the following order. Lucius Roscius was placed at
Seex, in Normandy; Quintus Cicero at Charleroy, not far from the scene of
the battle with the Nervii. Cicero had chosen this position for himself as
peculiarly advantageous; and his brother speaks of Caesar's acquiescence
in the arrangement as a special mark of favor to himself. Labienus was at
Lavacherie, on the Ourthe, about seventy miles to the south-east of
Cicero; and Sabinus and Cotta were at Tongres, among the Aduatuci, not far
from Liege, an equal distance from him to the north-east. Caius Fabius had
a legion at St. Pol, between Calais and Arras; Trebonius one at Amiens;
Marcus Crassus one at Montdidier; Munatius Plancus one across the Oise,
near Compiegne. Roscius was far off, but in a comparatively quiet country.
The other camps lay within a circle, two hundred miles in diameter, of
which Bavay was the centre. Amiens was at one point on the circumference.
Tongres, on the opposite side of it, to the north-east. Sabinus, being the
most exposed, had, in addition to his legion, a few cohorts lately raised
in Italy. Caesar, having no particular business to take him over the Alps,
remained, with Trebonius attending to general business. His dispositions
had been carefully watched by the Gauls. Caesar, they supposed, would go
away as usual; they even believed that he had gone; and a conspiracy was
formed in the north to destroy the legions in detail.

The instigator of the movement was Induciomarus, the leader of the patriot
party among the Treveri, whose intrigues had taken Caesar to the Moselle
before the first visit to Britain. At that time Induciomarus had been able
to do nothing; but a fairer opportunity had arrived. The overthrow of the
great German horde had affected powerfully the semi-Teutonic populations
on the left bank of the Rhine. The Eburones, a large tribe of German race
occupying the country between Liege and Cologne, had given in their
submission; but their strength was still undiminished, and Induciomarus
prevailed on their two chiefs, Ambiorix and Catavoleus, to attack Sabinus
and Cotta. It was midwinter. The camp at Tongres was isolated. The nearest
support was seventy miles distant. If one Roman camp was taken,
Induciomarus calculated that the country would rise; the others could be
separately surrounded, and Gaul would be free. The plot was well laid. An
entrenched camp being difficult to storm, the confederates decided to
begin by treachery. Ambiorix was personally known to many of the Roman
officers. He sent to Sabiuus to say that he wished to communicate with him
on a matter of the greatest consequence. An interview being granted, he
stated that a general conspiracy had been formed through the whole of Gaul
to surprise and destroy the legions. Each station was to be attacked on
the same day, that they might be unable to support each other. He
pretended himself to have remonstrated; but his tribe, he said, had been
carried away by the general enthusiasm for liberty, and he could not keep
them back. Vast bodies of Germans had crossed the Rhine to join in the
war. In two days at the furthest they would arrive. He was under private
obligations to Caesar, who had rescued his son and nephew in the fight
with the Aduatuci, and out of gratitude he wished to save Sabinus from
destruction, which was otherwise inevitable. He urged him to escape while
there was still time, and to join either Labienus or Cicero, giving a
solemn promise that he should not be molested on the road.

A council of officers was held on the receipt of this unwelcome
information. It was thought unlikely that the Eburones would rise by
themselves. It was probable enough, therefore, that the conspiracy was
more extensive. Cotta, who was second in command, was of opinion that it
would be rash and wrong to leave the camp without Caesar's orders. They
had abundant provisions. They could hold their own lines against any force
which the Germans could bring upon them, and help would not be long in
reaching them. It would be preposterous to take so grave a step on the
advice of an enemy. Sabinus unfortunately thought differently. He had been
over-cautious in Brittany, though he had afterward redeemed his fault.
Caesar, he persuaded himself, had left the country; each commander
therefore must act on his own responsibility. The story told by Ambiorix
was likely in itself. The Germans were known to be furious at the passage
of the Rhine, the destruction of Ariovistus, and their other defeats. Gaul
resented the loss of its independence. Ambiorix was acting like a true
friend, and it would be madness to refuse his offer. Two days' march would
bring them to their friends. If the alarm was false, they could return. If
there was to be a general insurrection, the legions could not be too
speedily brought together. If they waited, as Cotta advised, they would be
surrounded, and in the end would be starved into surrender.

Cotta was not convinced, and the majority of officers supported him. The
first duty of a Roman army, he said, was obedience to orders. Their
business was to hold the post which had been committed to them, till they
were otherwise directed. The officers were consulting in the midst of the
camp, surrounded by the legionaries. "Have it as you wish," Sabinus
exclaimed, in a tone which the men could hear; "I am not afraid of being
killed. If things go amiss, the troops will understand where to lay the
blame. If you allowed it, they might in forty-eight hours be at the next
quarters, facing the chances of war with their comrades, instead of
perishing here alone by sword or hunger."

Neither party would give way. The troops joined in the discussion. They
were willing either to go or to stay, if their commanders would agree; but
they said that it must be one thing or the other; disputes would be
certain ruin. The discussion lasted till midnight. Sabinus was obstinate,
Cotta at last withdrew his opposition, and the fatal resolution was formed
to march at dawn. The remaining hours of the night were passed by the men
in collecting such valuables as they wished to take with them. Everything
seemed ingeniously done to increase the difficulty of remaining, and to
add to the perils of the march by the exhaustion of the troops. The Meuse
lay between them and Labienus, so they had selected to go to Cicero at
Charleroy. Their course lay up the left bank of the little river
_Geer_. Trusting to the promises of Ambiorix, they started in loose
order, followed by a long train of carts and wagons. The Eburones lay,
waiting for them, in a large valley, two miles from the camp. When most of
the cohorts were entangled in the middle of the hollow, the enemy appeared
suddenly, some in front, some on both sides of the valley, some behind
threatening the baggage. Wise men, as Caesar says, anticipate possible
difficulties, and decide beforehand what they will do if occasions arise.
Sabinus had foreseen nothing and arranged nothing. Cotta, who had expected
what might happen, was better prepared, and did the best that was
possible. The men had scattered among the wagons, each to save or protect
what he could. Cotta ordered them back, bade them leave the carts to their
fate, and form together in a ring. He did right, Caesar thought; but the
effect was unfortunate. The troops lost heart, and the enemy was
encouraged, knowing that the baggage would only be abandoned when the
position was desperate. The Eburones were under good command. They did
not, as might have been expected, fly upon the plunder. They stood to
their work, well aware that the carts would not escape them. They were not
in great numbers. Caesar specially says that the Romans were as numerous
as they. But everything else was against the Romans. Sabinus could give no
directions. They were in a narrow meadow, with wooded hills on each side
of them filled with enemies whom they could not reach. When they charged,
the light-footed barbarians ran back; when they retired, they closed in
upon them again, and not a dart, an arrow, or a stone missed its mark
among the crowded cohorts. Bravely as the Romans fought, they were in a
trap where their courage was useless to them. The battle lasted from dawn
till the afternoon, and though they were falling fast, there was no
flinching and no cowardice. Caesar, who inquired particularly into the
minutest circumstances of the disaster, records by name the officers who
distinguished themselves; he mentions one whose courage he had marked
before, who was struck down with a lance through his thighs, and another
who was killed in rescuing his son. The brave Cotta was hit in the mouth
by a stone as he was cheering on his men. The end came at last. Sabinus,
helpless and distracted, caught sight of Ambiorix in the confusion, and
sent an interpreter to implore him to spare the remainder of the army.
Ambiorix answered that Sabinus might come to him, if he pleased; he hoped
he might persuade his tribe to be merciful; he promised that Sabinus
himself should suffer no injury. Sabinus asked Cotta to accompany him.
Cotta said he would never surrender to an armed enemy; and, wounded as he
was, he stayed with the legion. Sabinus, followed by the rest of the
surviving officers whom he ordered to attend him, proceeded to the spot
where the chief was standing. They were commanded to lay down their arms.
They obeyed, and were immediately killed; and with one wild yell the
barbarians then rushed in a mass on the deserted cohorts. Cotta fell, and
most of the others with him. The survivors, with the eagle of the legion,
which they had still faithfully guarded, struggled back in the dusk to
their deserted camp. The standard-bearer, surrounded by enemies, reached
the fosse, flung the eagle over the rampart, and fell with the last
effort. Those that were left fought on till night, and then, seeing that
hope was gone, died like Romans on each other's swords--a signal
illustration of the Roman greatness of mind, which had died out among the
degenerate patricians, but was living in all its force in Caesar's
legions. A few stragglers, who had been cut off during the battle from
their comrades, escaped in the night through the woods, and carried the
news to Labienus. Cicero, at Charleroy, was left in ignorance. The roads
were beset, and no messenger could reach him.

Induciomarus understood his countrymen. The conspiracy with which he had
frightened Sabinus had not as yet extended beyond a few northern chiefs,
hut the success of Ambiorix produced the effect which he desired. As soon
as it was known that two Roman generals had been cut off, the remnants of
the Aduatuci and the Nervii were in arms for their own revenge. The
smaller tribes along the Meuse and Sambre rose with them; and Cicero,
taken by surprise, found himself surrounded before he had a thought of
danger. The Gauls, knowing that their chances depended on the capture of
the second camp before assistance could arrive, flung themselves so
desperately on the entrenchments that the legionaries were barely able to
repel the first assault. The assailants were driven back at last, and
Cicero despatched messengers to Caesar to Amiens, to give him notice of
the rising; but not a man was able to penetrate through the multitude of
enemies which now swarmed in the woods. The troops worked gallantly,
strengthening the weak points of their fortifications. In one night they
raised a hundred and twenty towers on their walls. Again the Gauls tried a
storm, and, though they failed a second time, they left the garrison no
rest either by day or night. There was no leisure for sleep; not a hand
could be spared from the lines to care for the sick or wounded. Cicero was
in bad health, but he clung to his work till the men carried him by force
to his tent and obliged him to lie down. The first surprise not having
succeeded, the Nervian chiefs, who knew Cicero, desired a parley. They
told the same story which Ambiorix had told, that the Germans had crossed
the Rhine, and that all Gaul was in arms. They informed him of the
destruction of Sabinus; they warned him that the same fate was hanging
over himself, and that his only hope was in surrender. They did not wish,
they said, to hurt either him or the Roman people; he and his troops would
be free to go where they pleased, but they were determined to prevent the
legions from quartering themselves permanently in their country.

There was but one Sabinus in the Roman army. Cicero answered, with a
spirit worthy of his country, that Romans accepted no conditions from
enemies in arms. The Gauls might, if they pleased, send a deputation to
Caesar, and hear what he would say to them. For himself, he had no
authority to listen to them. Force and treachery being alike unavailing,
they resolved to starve Cicero out. They had watched the Roman strategy.
They had seen and felt the value of the entrenchments. They made a bank
and ditch all round the camp, and, though they had no tools but their
swords with which to dig turf and cut trees, so many there were of them
that the work was completed in three hours.[1] Having thus pinned the
Romans in, they slung red-hot balls and flung darts carrying lighted straw
over the ramparts of the camp on the thatched roofs of the soldiers' huts.
The wind was high, the fire spread, and amidst the smoke and the blaze the
Gauls again rushed on from all sides to the assault. Roman discipline was
never more severely tried, and never showed its excellence more signally.
The houses and stores of the soldiers were in flames behind them. The
enemy were pressing on the walls in front, covered by a storm of javelins
and stones and arrows, but not a man left his post to save his property or
to extinguish the fire. They fought as they stood, striking down rank
after rank of the Gauls, who still crowded on, trampling on the bodies of
their companions, as the foremost lines fell dead into the ditch. Such as
reached the wall never left it alive, for they were driven forward by the
throng behind on the swords of the legionaries. Thousands of them had
fallen, before, in desperation, they drew back at last.

But Cicero's situation was almost desperate too. The huts were destroyed.
The majority of the men were wounded, and those able to bear arms were
daily growing weaker in number. Caesar was 120 miles distant, and no word
had reached him of the danger. Messengers were again sent off, but they
were caught one after another, and were tortured to death in front of the
ramparts, and the boldest men shrank from risking their lives on so
hopeless an enterprise. At length a Nervian slave was found to make
another adventure. He was a Gaul, and could easily disguise himself. A
letter to Caesar was enclosed in the shaft of his javelin. He glided out
of the camp in the dark, passed undetected among the enemies as one of
themselves, and, escaping from their lines, made his way to Amiens.

Swiftness of movement was Caesar's distinguishing excellence. The legions
were kept ready to march at an hour's notice. He sent an order to Crassus
to join him instantly from Montdidier. He sent to Fabius at St. Pol to
meet him at Arras. He wrote to Labienus, telling him the situation, and
leaving him to his discretion to advance or to remain on his guard at
Lavacherie, as might seem most prudent. Not caring to wait for the rest of
his army, and leaving Crassus to take care of Amiens, he started himself,
the morning after the information reached him, with Trebonius's legion to
Cicero's relief. Fabius joined him, as he had been directed, at Arras. He
had hoped for Labienus's presence also; but Labienus sent to say that he
was surrounded by the Treveri, and dared not stir. Caesar approved his
hesitation, and with but two legions, amounting in all to only 7,000 men,
he hurried forward to the Nervian border. Learning that Cicero was still
holding out, he wrote a letter to him in Greek, that it might be
unintelligible if intercepted, to tell him that help was near. A Gaul
carried the letter, and fastened it by a line to his javelin, which he
flung over Cicero's rampart. The javelin stuck in the side of one of the
towers and was unobserved for several days. The besiegers were better
informed. They learnt that Caesar was at hand, that he had but a handful
of men with him. By that time their own numbers had risen to 60,000, and,
leaving Cicero to be dealt with at leisure, they moved off to envelop and
destroy their great enemy. Caesar was well served by spies. He knew that
Cicero was no longer in immediate danger, and there was thus no occasion
for him to risk a battle at a disadvantage to relieve him. When he found
the Gauls near him, he encamped, drawing his lines as narrowly as he
could, that from the small show which he made they might imagine his
troops to be even fewer than they were. He invited attack by an
ostentation of timidity, and having tempted the Gauls to become the
assailants, he flung open his gates, rushed out upon them with his whole
force, and all but annihilated them. The patriot army was broken to
pieces, and the unfortunate Nervii and Aduatuci never rallied from this
second blow. Caesar could then go at his leisure to Cicero and his
comrades, who had fought so nobly against such desperate odds. In every
ten men he found that there was but one unwounded. He inquired with minute
curiosity into every detail of the siege. In a general address he thanked
Cicero and the whole legion. He thanked the officers man by man for their
gallantry and fidelity. Now for the first time (and that he could have
remained ignorant of it so long speaks for the passionate unanimity with
which the Gauls had risen) he learnt from prisoners the fate of Sabinus.
He did not underrate the greatness of the catastrophe. The soldiers in the
army he treated always as friends and comrades in arms, and the loss of so
many of them was as personally grievous to him as the effects of it might
be politically mischievous. He made it the subject of a second speech to
his own and to Cicero's troops, but he spoke to encourage and to console.
A serious misfortune had happened, he said, through the fault of one of
his generals, but it must be borne with equanimity, and had already been
heroically expiated. The meeting with Cicero must have been an interesting
one. He and the two Ciceros had been friends and companions in youth. It
would have been well if Marcus Tullius could have remembered in the coming
years the personal exertion with which Caesar had rescued a brother to
whom he was so warmly attached.

Communications among the Gauls were feverishly rapid. While the Nervii
were attacking Cicero, Induciomarus and the Treveri had surrounded
Labienus at Lavacherie. Caesar had entered Cicero's camp at three o'clock
in the afternoon. The news reached Induciomarus before midnight, and he
had disappeared by the morning. Caesar returned to Amiens, but the whole
country was now in a state of excitement. He had intended to go to Italy,
but he abandoned all thoughts of departure. Rumors came of messengers
hurrying to and fro, of meetings at night in lonely places, of
confederacies among the patriots. Even Brittany was growing uneasy; a
force had been collected to attack Roscius, though it had dispersed after
the relief of Cicero. Caesar again summoned the chiefs to come to him, and
between threats and encouragements succeeded in preventing a general
rising. But the tribes on the upper Seine broke into disturbance. The
Aedui and the Remi alone remained really loyal; and it was evident that
only a leader was wanted to raise the whole of Gaul. Caesar himself
admitted that nothing could be more natural. The more high-spirited of the
Gauls were miserable to see that their countrymen had so lost conceit of
themselves as to submit willingly to the Roman rule.

Induciomarus was busy all the winter soliciting help from the Germans, and
promising money and lands. The Germans had had enough of fighting the
Romans, and, as long as their own independence was not threatened, were
disinclined to move; but Induciomarus, nothing daunted, gathered
volunteers on all sides. His camp became a rallying point for
disaffection. Envoys came privately to him from distant tribes. He, too,
held his rival council, and a fresh attack on the camp of Labienus was to
be the first step in a general war. Labienus, well informed of what was
going on, watched him quietly from his entrenchments. When the Gauls
approached, he affected fear, as Caesar had done, and he secretly formed a
body of cavalry, of whose existence they had no suspicion. Induciomarus
became careless. Day after day he rode round the entrenchments, insulting
the Romans as cowards, and his men flinging their javelins over the walls.
Labienus remained passive, till one evening, when, after one of these
displays, the loose bands of the Gauls had scattered, he sent his horse
out suddenly with orders to fight neither with small nor great, save with
Induciomarus only, and promising a reward for his head. Fortune favored
him. Induciomarus was overtaken and killed in a ford of the Ourthe, and
for the moment the agitation was cooled down. But the impression which had
been excited by the destruction of Sabinus was still telling through the
country. Caesar expected fresh trouble in the coming summer, and spent the
rest of the winter and spring in preparing for a new struggle. Future
peace depended on convincing the Gauls of the inexhaustible resources of
Italy; on showing them that any loss which might be inflicted could be
immediately repaired, and that the army could and would be maintained in
whatever strength might be necessary to coerce them. He raised two fresh
legions in his own province. Pompey had formed a legion in the north of
Italy, within Caesar's boundaries, for service in Spain. Caesar requested
Pompey to lend him this legion for immediate purposes; and Pompey, who was
still on good terms with Caesar, recognized the importance of the
occasion, and consented without difficulty.

[Sidenote: B.C. 53.]
Thus amply reinforced, Caesar, before the grass had begun to grow, took
the field against the tribes which were openly disaffected. The first
business was to punish the Belgians, who had attacked Cicero. He fell
suddenly on the Nervii with four legions, seized their cattle, wasted
their country, and carried off thousands of them to be sold into slavery.
Returning to Amiens, he again called the chiefs about him, and, the Seine
tribes refusing to put in an appearance, he transferred the council to
Paris, and, advancing by rapid marches, he brought the Senones and
Carnutes to pray for pardon.[2] He then turned on the Treveri and their
allies, who, under Ambiorix, had destroyed Sabinus. Leaving Labienus with
the additional legions to check the Treveri, he went himself into
Flanders, where Ambiorix was hiding among the rivers and marshes. He threw
bridges over the dikes, burnt the villages, and carried off an enormous
spoil, of cattle and, alas! of men. To favor and enrich the tribes that
submitted after a first defeat, to depopulate the determinately rebellious
by seizing and selling as slaves those who had forfeited a right to his
protection, was his uniform and, as the event proved, entirely successful
policy. The persuasions of the Treveri had failed with the nearer German
tribes; but some of the Suevi, who had never seen the Romans, were tempted
to adventure over and try their fortunes; and the Treveri were waiting for
them, to set on Labienus, in Caesar's absence. Labienus went in search of
the Treveri, tempted them into an engagement by a feigned flight, killed
many of them, and filled his camp with prisoners. Their German allies
retreated again across the river, and the patriot chiefs, who had gone
with Induciomarus, concealed themselves in the forests of Westphalia.
Caesar thought it desirable to renew the admonition which he had given the
Germans two years before, and again threw a bridge over the Rhine at the
same place where he had made the first, but a little higher up the stream.
Experience made the construction more easy. The bridge was begun and
finished in a few days, but this time the labor was thrown away. The
operation itself lost its impressiveness by repetition, and the barrenness
of practical results was more evident than before. The Sueves, who had
gone home, were far away in the interior. To lead the heavily armed
legions in pursuit of wild light-footed marauders, who had not a town
which could be burned, or a field of corn which could be cut for food, was
to waste their strength to no purpose, and to prove still more plainly
that in their own forests they were beyond the reach of vengeance. Caesar
drew back again, after a brief visit to his allies the Ubii, cut two
hundred feet of the bridge on the German side, and leaving the rest
standing with a guard to defend it, he went in search of Ambiorix, who had
as yet eluded him, in the Ardennes. Ambiorix had added treachery to
insurrection, and as long as he was free and unpunished the massacred
legion had not been fully avenged. Caesar was particularly anxious to
catch him, and once had found the nest warm which Ambiorix had left but a
few moments before.

In the pursuit he came again to Tongres, to the fatal camp which Sabinus
had deserted and in which the last of the legionaries had killed each
other, rather than degrade the Roman name by allowing themselves to be
captured. The spot was fated, and narrowly escaped being the scene of a
second catastrophe as frightful as the first. The entrenchments were
standing as they were left, ready to be occupied. Caesar, finding himself
encumbered by his heavy baggage in the pursuit of Ambiorix, decided to
leave it there with Quintus Cicero and the 14th legion. He was going
himself to scour Brabant and East Flanders as far as the Scheldt. In seven
days he promised to return, and meanwhile he gave Cicero strict directions
to keep the legion within the lines, and not to allow any of the men to
stray. It happened that after Caesar recrossed the Rhine two thousand
German horse had followed in bravado, and were then plundering between
Tongres and the river. Hearing that there was a rich booty in the camp,
that Caesar was away, and only a small party had been left to guard it,
they decided to try to take the place by a sudden stroke. Cicero, seeing
no sign of an enemy, had permitted his men to disperse in foraging
parties. The Germans were on them before they could recover their
entrenchments, and they had to form at a distance and defend themselves as
they could. The gates of the camp were open, and the enemy were actually
inside before the few maniples who were left there were able to collect
and resist them. Fortunately Sextius Bacillus, the same officer who had so
brilliantly distinguished himself in the battle with the Nervii, and had
since been badly wounded, was lying sick in his tent, where he had been
for five days, unable to touch food. Hearing the disturbance, Bacillus
sprang out, snatched a sword, rallied such men as he could find, and
checked the attack for a few minutes. Other officers rushed to his help,
and the legionaries having their centurions with them recovered their
steadiness. Sextius Bacillus was again severely hurt, and fainted, but he
was carried off in safety. Some of the cohorts who were outside, and had
been for a time cut off, made their way into the camp to join the
defenders, and the Germans, who had come without any fixed purpose, merely
for plunder, gave way and galloped off again. They left the Romans,
however, still in the utmost consternation. The scene and the associations
of it suggested the most gloomy anticipations. They thought that German
cavalry could never be so far from the Rhine, unless their countrymen were
invading in force behind them. Caesar, it was supposed, must have been
surprised and destroyed, and they and every Roman in Gaul would soon share
the same fate. Brave as they were, the Roman soldiers seem to have been
curiously liable to panics of this kind. The faith with which they relied
upon their general avenged itself through the completeness with which they
were accustomed to depend upon him. He returned on the day which he had
fixed, and not unnaturally was displeased at the disregard of his orders.
He did not, or does not in his Commentaries, professedly blame Cicero. But
the Ciceros perhaps resented the loss of confidence which one of them had
brought upon himself. Quintus Cicero cooled in his zeal, and afterward
amused the leisure of his winter quarters with composing worthless dramas.

Ambiorix had again escaped, and was never taken. The punishment fell on
his tribe. The Eburones were completely rooted out. The turn of the
Carnutes and Senones came next. The people themselves were spared; but
their leader, a chief named Acco, who was found to have instigated the
revolt, was arrested and executed. Again the whole of Gaul settled into
seeming quiet; and Caesar went to Italy, where the political frenzy was
now boiling over.

[1] Caesar says their trenches were fifteen miles long. This is, perhaps,
    a mistake of the transcriber. A Roman camp did not usually cover more
    than a few acres.

[2] People about Sens, Melun, and Chartres.




CHAPTER XVIII.


[Sidenote: B.C. 55.]
The conference at Lucca and the Senate's indifference had determined
Cicero to throw in his lot with the trimmers. He had remonstrated with
Pompey on the imprudence of prolonging Caesar's command. Pompey, he
thought, would find out in time that he had made Caesar too strong for
him; but Pompey had refused to listen, and Cicero had concluded that he
must consider his own interests. His brother Quintus joined the army in
Gaul to take part in the invasion of Britain, and to share the dangers and
the honors of the winter which followed it. Cicero himself began a warm
correspondence with Caesar, and through Quintus sent continued messages to
him. Literature was a neutral ground on which he could approach his
political enemy without too open discredit, and he courted eagerly the
approval of a critic whose literary genius he esteemed as highly as his
own. Men of genuine ability are rarely vain of what they can do really
well. Cicero admired himself as a statesman with the most unbounded
enthusiasm. He was proud of his verses, which were hopelessly commonplace.
In the art in which he was without a rival he was modest and diffident. He
sent his various writings for Caesar's judgment. "Like the traveller who
has overslept himself," he said, "yet by extraordinary exertions reaches
his goal sooner than if he had been earlier on the road, I will follow
your advice and court this man. I have been asleep too long. I will
correct my slowness with my speed; and as you say he approves my verses, I
shall travel not with a common carriage, but with a four-in-hand of
poetry." [1]

"What does Caesar say of my poems?" he wrote again. "He tells me in one of
his letters that he has never read better Greek. At one place he writes
[Greek: rathumotera] [somewhat careless]. This is his word. Tell me the
truth, Was it the matter which did not please him, or the style?" "Do not
be afraid," he added with candid simplicity; "I shall not think a hair the
worse of myself." [2]

His affairs were still in disorder. Caesar had now large sums at his
disposition. Cicero gave the highest proof of the sincerity of his
conversion by accepting money from him. "You say," he observed in another
letter, "that Caesar shows every day more marks of his affection for you.
It gives me infinite pleasure. I can have no second thoughts in Caesar's
affairs. I act on conviction, and am doing but my duty; but I am inflamed
with love for him." [3]

With Pompey and Crassus Cicero seemed equally familiar. When their
consulship was over, their provinces were assigned as had been determined.
Pompey had Spain, with six legions. He remained himself at Rome, sending
lieutenants in charge of them. Crassus aspired to equal the glory of his
colleagues in the open field. He had gained some successes in the war with
the slaves which persuaded him that he too could be a conqueror; and
knowing as much of foreign campaigning as the clerks in his factories, he
intended to use Syria as a base of operations against the Parthians, and
to extend the frontier to the Indus. The Senate had murmured, but Cicero
had passionately defended Crassus;[4] and as if to show publicly how
entirely he had now devoted himself to the cause of the "Dynasts," he
invited Crassus to dine with him the day before his departure for the
East.

The position was not wholly pleasant to Cicero. "Self-respect in speech,
liberty in choosing the course which we will pursue, is all gone," he
wrote to Lentulus Spinther--"gone not more from me than from us all. We
must assent, as a matter of course, to what a few men say, or we must
differ from them to no purpose.--The relations of the Senate, of the
courts of justice, nay, of the whole Commonwealth are changed.--The
consular dignity of a firm and courageous statesman can no longer be
thought of. It has been lost by the folly of those who estranged from the
Senate the compact order of the equites and a very distinguished man
[Caesar]." [5] And again: "We must go with the times. Those who have
played a great part in public life have never been able to adhere to the
same views on all occasions. The art of navigation lies in trimming to the
storm. When you can reach your harbor by altering your course, it is a
folly to persevere in struggling against the wind. Were I entirely free I
should still act as I am doing; and when I am invited to my present
attitude by the kindness of one set of men, and am driven to it by the
injurious conduct of the other, I am content to do what I conceive will
conduce at once to my own advantage and the welfare of the State.--
Caesar's influence is enormous. His wealth is vast. I have the use of
both, as if they were my own. Nor could I have crushed the conspiracy of a
set of villains to ruin me, unless, in addition to the defences which I
always possessed, I had secured the goodwill of the men in power." [6]

[Sidenote: B.C. 54.]
Cicero's conscience could not have been easy when he was driven to such
laborious apologies. He spoke often of intending to withdraw into his
family, and devoting his time entirely to literature; but he could not
bring himself to leave the political ferment; and he was possessed besides
with a passionate desire to revenge himself on those who had injured him.
An opportunity seemed to present itself. The persons whom he hated most,
after Clodius, were the two consuls Gabinius and Piso, who had permitted
his exile. They had both conducted themselves abominably in the provinces,
which they had bought, he said, at the price of his blood. Piso had been
sent to Macedonia, where he had allowed his army to perish by disease and
neglect. The frontiers had been overrun with brigands, and the outcries of
his subjects had been audible even in Rome against his tyranny and
incapacity. Gabinius, in Syria, had been more ambitious, and had exposed
himself to an indignation more violent because more interested. At a hint
from Pompey, he had restored Ptolemy to Egypt on his own authority and
without waiting for the Senate's sanction, and he had snatched for himself
the prize for which the chiefs of the Senate had been contending. He had
broken the law by leading his legions over the frontier. He had defeated
the feeble Alexandrians, and the gratified Ptolemy had rewarded him with
the prodigious sum of ten thousand talents--a million and a half of
English money. While he thus enriched himself he had irritated the
knights, who might otherwise have supported him, by quarrelling with the
Syrian revenue farmers, and, according to popular scandal, he had
plundered the province worse than it had been plundered even by the
pirates.

When so fair a chance was thrown in his way, Cicero would have been more
than human if he had not availed himself of it. He moved in the Senate for
the recall of the two offenders, and in the finest of his speeches he laid
bare their reputed iniquities. His position was a delicate one, because
the senatorial party, could they have had their way, would have recalled
Caesar also. Gabinius was Pompey's favorite, and Piso was Caesar's father-
in-law. Cicero had no intention of quarrelling with Caesar; between his
invectives, therefore, he was careful to interweave the most elaborate
compliments to the conqueror of Gaul. He dwelt with extraordinary
clearness on the value of Caesar's achievements. The conquest of Gaul, he
said, was not the annexation of a province. It was the dispersion of a
cloud which had threatened Italy from the days of Brennus. To recall
Caesar would be madness. He wished to remain only to complete his work;
the more honor to him that he was willing to let the laurels fade which
were waiting for him at Rome, before he returned to wear them. There were
persons who would bring him back, because they did not love him. They
would bring him back only to enjoy a triumph. Gaul had been the single
danger to the Empire. Nature had fortified Italy by the Alps. The
mountain-barrier alone had allowed Rome to grow to its present greatness,
but the Alps might now sink into the earth, Italy had no more to
fear.[7]

The orator perhaps hoped that so splendid a vindication of Caesar in the
midst of his worst enemies might have purchased pardon for his onslaught
on the baser members of the "Dynastic" faction. He found himself mistaken.
His eagerness to revenge his personal wrongs compelled him to drink the
bitterest cup of humiliation which had yet been offered to him. He gained
his immediate purpose. The two governors were recalled in disgrace, and
Gabinius was impeached under the new Julian law for having restored
Ptolemy without orders, and for the corrupt administration of his
province. Cicero would naturally have conducted the prosecution; but
pressure of some kind was laid on, which compelled him to stand aside. The
result of the trial on the first of the two indictments was another of
those mockeries of justice which made the Roman law-courts the jest of
mankind. Pompey threw his shield over his instrument. He used his
influence freely. The Egyptian spoils furnished a fund to corrupt the
judges. The speech for the prosecution was so weak as to invite a failure,
and Gabinius was acquitted by a majority of purchased votes. "You ask me
how I endure such things," Cicero bitterly wrote, in telling the story to
Atticus; "well enough, by Hercules, and I am entirely pleased with myself.
We have lost, my friend, not only the juice and blood, but even the color
and shape, of a commonwealth. No decent constitution exists in which I can
take a part. How can you put up with such a state of things? you will say.
Excellently well. I recollect how public affairs went awhile ago, when I
was myself in office, and how grateful people were to me. I am not
distressed now, that the power is with a single man. Those are miserable
who could not bear to see me successful. I find much to console me." [8]
"Gabinius is acquitted," he wrote to his brother.--"The verdict is so
infamous that it is thought he will be convicted on the other charge; but,
as you perceive, the constitution, the Senate, the courts, are all nought.
There is no honor in any one of us.--Some persons, Sallust among them, say
that I ought to have prosecuted him. I to risk my credit with such a jury!
what if I had acted, and he had escaped then! but other motives influenced
me. Pompey would have made a personal quarrel of it with me. He would have
come into the city.[9]--He would have taken up with Clodius again. I
know that I was wise, and I hope that you agree with me. I owe Pompey
nothing, and he owes much to me; but in public matters (not to put it more
strongly) he has not allowed me to oppose him; and when I was flourishing
and he was less powerful than he is now, he let me see what he could do.
Now when I am not even ambitious of power, and the constitution is broken
down, and Pompey is omnipotent, why should I contend with him? Then, says
Sallust, I ought to have pleased Pompey by defending Gabinius, as he was
anxious that I should. A nice friend Sallust, who would have me push
myself into dangerous quarrels, or cover myself with eternal infamy!" [10]

Unhappy Cicero, wishing to act honorably, but without manliness to face
the consequences! He knew that it would be infamous for him to defend
Gabinius, yet at the second trial Cicero, who had led the attack on him in
the Senate, and had heaped invectives on him, the most bitter which he
ever uttered against man, nevertheless actually did defend Gabinius.
Perhaps he consoled himself with the certainty that his eloquence would be
in vain, and that his extraordinary client this time could not escape
conviction. Any way, he appeared at the bar as Gabinius's counsel. The
Syrian revenue farmers were present, open-mouthed with their accusations.
Gabinius was condemned, stripped of his spoils, and sent into banishment.
Cicero was left with his shame. Nor was this the worst. There were still
some dregs in the cup, which he was forced to drain. Publius Vatinius was
a prominent leader of the military democratic party, and had often come in
collision with Cicero. He had been tribune when Caesar was consul, and had
stood by him against the Senate and Bibulus. He had served in Gaul in
Caesar's first campaigns, and had returned to Rome, at Caesar's instance,
to enter for higher office. He had carried the praetorship against Cato;
and Cicero in one of his speeches had painted him as another Clodius or
Catiline. When the praetorship was expired, he was prosecuted for
corruption; and Cicero was once more compelled to appear on the other
side, and defend him, as he had done Gabinius. Caesar and Pompey, wishing
perhaps to break completely into harness the brilliant but still half
unmanageable orator, had so ordered, and Cicero had complied. He was
ashamed, but he had still his points of satisfaction. It was a matter of
course that, as an advocate, he must praise the man whom, a year before,
he had spattered with ignominy; but he had the pleasure of feeling that he
was revenging himself on his conservative allies, who led the prosecution.
"Why I praised Vatinius," he wrote to Lentulus, "I must beg you not to ask
either in the case of this or of any other criminal. I put it to the
judges that since certain noble lords, my good friends, were too fond of
my adversary [Clodius], and in the Senate would go apart with him under my
own eyes, and would treat him with warmest affection, they must allow me
to have my Publius [Vatinius], since they had theirs [Clodius], and give
them a gentle stab in return for their cuts at me." [11] Vatinius was
acquitted. Cicero was very miserable. "Gods and men approved," he said;
but his own conscience condemned him, and at this time his one
consolation, real or pretended, was the friendship of Caesar. "Caesar's
affectionate letters," he told his brother, "are my only pleasure; I
attach little consequence to his promises; I do not thirst for honors, or
regret my past glory. I value more the continuance of his good-will than
the prospect of anything which he may do for me. I am withdrawing from
public affairs, and giving myself to literature. But I am broken-hearted,
my dear brother;--I am broken-hearted that the constitution is gone, that
the courts of law are naught; and that now at my time of life, when I
ought to be leading with authority in the Senate, I must be either busy in
the Forum pleading, or occupying myself with my books at home. The
ambition of my boyhood--

    Aye to be first, and chief among my peers--

is all departed. Of my enemies, I have left some unassailed, and some I
even defend. Not only I may not think as I like, but I may not hate as I
like,[12] and Caesar is the only person who loves me as I should wish to
be loved, or, as some think, who desires to love me." [13]

[Sidenote: B.C. 53.]
The position was the more piteous, because Cicero could not tell how
events would fall out after all. Crassus was in the East, with uncertain
prospects there. Caesar was in the midst of a dangerous war, and might be
killed or might die. Pompey was but a weak vessel; a distinguished
soldier, perhaps, but without the intellect or the resolution to control a
proud, resentful, and supremely unscrupulous aristocracy. In spite of
Caesar's victories, his most envenomed enemy, Domitius Ahenobarbus, had
succeeded after all in carrying one of the consulships for the year 54.
The popular party had secured the other, indeed; but they had returned
Appius Claudius, Clodius's brother, and this was but a poor consolation.
In the year that was to follow, the conservatives had bribed to an extent
which astonished the most cynical observers. Each season the elections
were growing more corrupt; but the proceedings on both sides in the fall
of 54 were the most audacious that had ever been known, the two reigning
consuls taking part, and encouraging and assisting in scandalous bargains.
"All the candidates have bribed," wrote Cicero; "but they will be all
acquitted, and no one will ever be found guilty again. The two consuls are
branded with infamy." Memmius, the popular competitor, at Pompey's
instance, exposed in the Senate an arrangement which the consuls had
entered into to secure the returns. The names and signatures were
produced. The scandal was monstrous, and could not be denied. The better
kind of men began to speak of a dictatorship as the only remedy; and
although the two conservative candidates were declared elected for 53, and
were allowed to enter on their offices, there was a general feeling that a
crisis had arrived, and that a great catastrophe could not be very far
off. The form which it might assume was the problem of the hour.

Cicero, speaking two years before on the broad conditions of his time, had
used these remarkable words: "No issue can be anticipated from discords
among the leading men, except either universal ruin, or the rule of a
conqueror, or a monarchy. There exists at present an unconcealed hatred
implanted and fastened into the minds of our leading politicians. They are
at issue among themselves. Opportunities are caught for mutual injury.
Those who are in the second rank watch for the chances of the time. Those
who might do better are afraid of the words and designs of their
enemies." [14]

The discord had been suspended, and the intrigues temporarily checked, by
the combination of Caesar and Pompey with Crassus, the chief of the
moneyed commoners. Two men of equal military reputation, and one of them
from his greater age and older services expecting and claiming precedency,
do not easily work together. For Pompey to witness the rising glory of
Caesar, and to feel in his own person the superior ascendency of Caesar's
character, without an emotion of jealousy, would have demanded a degree of
virtue which few men have ever possessed. They had been united so far by
identity of conviction, by a military detestation of anarchy, by a common
interest in wringing justice from the Senate for the army and people, by a
pride in the greatness of their country, which they were determined to
uphold. These motives, however, might not long have borne the strain but
for other ties, which had cemented their union. Pompey had married
Caesar's daughter, to whom he was passionately attached; and the personal
competition between them was neutralized by the third element of the
capitalist party represented by Crassus, which if they quarrelled would
secure the supremacy of the faction to which Crassus attached himself.
There was no jealousy on Caesar's part. There was no occasion for it.
Caesar's fame was rising. Pompey had added nothing to his past
distinctions, and the glory pales which does not grow in lustre. No man
who had once been the single object of admiration, who had tasted the
delight of being the first in the eyes of his countrymen, could find
himself compelled to share their applause with a younger rival without
experiencing a pang. So far Pompey had borne the trial well. He was on the
whole, notwithstanding the Egyptian scandal, honorable and
constitutionally disinterested. He was immeasurably superior to the
fanatic Cato, to the shifty Cicero, or the proud and worthless leaders of
the senatorial oligarchy. Had the circumstances remained unchanged, the
severity of the situation might have been overcome. But two misfortunes
coming near upon one another broke the ties of family connection, and by
destroying the balance of parties laid Pompey open to the temptation of
patrician intrigue. In the year 54 Caesar's great mother Aurelia, and his
sister Julia, Pompey's wife, both died. A child which Julia had borne to
Pompey died also, and the powerful if silent influence of two remarkable
women, and the joint interest in an infant, who would have been Caesar's
heir as well as Pompey's, were swept away together.

The political link was broken immediately after by a public disaster
unequalled since the last consular army was overthrown by the Gauls on the
Rhone; and the capitalists, left without a leader, drifted away to their
natural allies in the Senate. Crassus had taken the field in the East,
with a wild ambition of becoming in his turn a great conqueror. At first
all had gone well with him. He had raised a vast treasure. He had
plundered the wealthy temples in Phoenicia and Palestine to fill his
military chest. He had able officers with him; not the least among them
his son Publius Crassus, who had served with such distinction under
Caesar. He crossed the Euphrates at the head of a magnificent army,
expecting to carry all before him with the ease of an Alexander. Relying
on his own idle judgment, he was tempted in the midst of a burning summer
into the waterless plains of Mesopotamia; and on the 15th of June the
great Roman millionaire met his miserable end, the whole force, with the
exception of a few scattered cohorts, being totally annihilated.

The catastrophe in itself was terrible. The Parthians had not provoked the
war. The East was left defenceless; and the natural expectation was that,
in their just revenge, they might carry fire and sword through Asia Minor
and Syria. It is not the least remarkable sign of the times that the
danger failed to touch the patriotism of the wretched factions in Rome.
The one thought of the leaders of the Senate was to turn the opportunity
to advantage, wrest the constitution free from military dictation, shake
off the detested laws of Caesar, and revenge themselves on the author of
them. Their hope was in Pompey. If Pompey could be won over from Caesar,
the army would be divided. Pompey, they well knew, unless he had a
stronger head than his own to guide him, could be used till the victory
was won, and then be thrust aside. It was but too easy to persuade him
that he was the greatest man in the Empire; and that as the chief of a
constitutional government, and with the Senate at his side, he would
inscribe his name in the annals of his country as the restorer of Roman
liberty.

The intrigue could not be matured immediately. The aristocracy had first
to overcome their own animosities against Pompey, and Pompey himself was
generous, and did not yield to the first efforts of seduction. The smaller
passions were still at work among the baser senatorial chiefs, and the
appetite for provinces and pillage. The Senate, even while Crassus was
alive, had carried the consulships for 53 by the most infamous corruption.
They meant now to attack Caesar in earnest, and their energies were
addressed to controlling the elections for the next year. Milo was one of
the candidates; and Cicero, who was watching the political current,
reverted to his old friendship for him, and became active in the canvass.
Milo was not a creditable ally. He already owed half a million of money,
and Cicero, who was anxious for his reputation, endeavored to keep him
within the bounds of decency. But Milo's mind was fastened on the province
which was to redeem his fortunes, and he flung into bribery what was left
of his wrecked credit with the desperation of a gambler. He had not been
praetor, and thus was not legally eligible for the consulate. This,
however, was forgiven. He had been aedile in 54, and as aedile he had
already been magnificent in prodigality. But to secure the larger prize,
he gave as a private citizen the most gorgeous entertainment which even in
that monstrous age the city had yet wondered at. "Doubly, trebly foolish
of him," thought Cicero, "for he was not called on to go to such expense,
and he has not the means." "Milo makes me very anxious," he wrote to his
brother. "I hope all will be made right by his consulship. I shall exert
myself for him as much as I did for myself;[15] but he is quite mad,"
Cicero added; "he has spent L30,000 on his games." Mad, but still, in
Cicero's opinion, well fitted for the consulship, and likely to get it.
All the "good," in common with himself, were most anxious for Milo's
success. The people would vote for him as a reward for the spectacles, and
the young and influential for his efforts to secure their favor.[16]

The reappearance of the "Boni," the "Good," in Cicero's letters marks the
turn of the tide again in his own mind. The "Good," or the senatorial
party, were once more the objects of his admiration. The affection for
Caesar was passing off.

[Sidenote: B.C. 52.]
A more objectionable candidate than Milo could hardly have been found. He
was no better than a patrician gladiator, and the choice of such a man was
a sufficient indication of the Senate's intentions. The popular party led
by the tribunes made a sturdy resistance. There were storms in the Curia,
tribunes imprisoning senators, and the Senate tribunes. Army officers
suggested the election of military tribunes (lieutenant-generals), instead
of consuls; and when they failed, they invited Pompey to declare himself
Dictator. The Senate put on mourning, as a sign of approaching calamity.
Pompey calmed their fears by declining so ambitious a position. But as it
was obvious that Milo's chief object was a province which he might
misgovern, Pompey forced the Senate to pass a resolution that consuls and
praetors must wait five years from their term of office before a province
was to be allotted to them. The temptation to corruption might thus in
some degree be diminished. But senatorial resolutions did not pass for
much, and what a vote had enacted a vote could repeal. The agitation
continued. The tribunes, when the time came, forbade the elections. The
year expired. The old magistrates went out of office, and Rome was left
again without legitimate functionaries to carry on the government. All the
offices fell vacant together.

Now once more Clodius was reappearing on the scene. He had been silent for
two years, content or constrained to leave the control of the democracy to
the three chiefs. One of them was now gone. The more advanced section of
the party was beginning to distrust Pompey. Clodius, their favorite
representative, had been put forward for the praetorship, while Milo was
aspiring to be made consul, and Clodius had prepared a fresh batch of laws
to be submitted to the sovereign people; one of which (if Cicero did not
misrepresent it to inflame the aristocracy) was a measure of some kind for
the enfranchisement of the slaves, or perhaps of the sons of slaves.[17]
He was as popular as ever. He claimed to be acting for Caesar, and was
held certain of success; if he was actually praetor, such was his
extraordinary influence, and such was the condition of things in the city,
that if Milo was out of the way he could secure consuls of his own way of
thinking, and thus have the whole constitutional power in his hands.[18]

Thus both sides had reason for fearing and postponing the elections.
Authority, which had been weak before, was now extinct. Rome was in a
state of formal anarchy, and the factions of Milo and Clodius fought
daily, as before, in the streets, with no one to interfere with them.

Violent humors come naturally to a violent end. Milo had long before
threatened to kill Clodius. Cicero had openly boasted of his friend's
intention to do it, and had spoken of Clodius in the Senate itself as
Milo's predestined victim. On the evening of the 13th January, while the
uncertainty about the elections was at its height, Clodius was returning
from his country house, which was a few miles from Rome on "the Appian
Way." Milo happened to be travelling accidentally down the same road, on
his way to Lanuvium (Civita Indovina), and the two rivals and their
escorts met. Milo's party was the largest. The leaders passed one another,
evidently not intending a collision, but their followers, who were
continually at sword's point, came naturally to blows. Clodius rode back
to see what was going on; he was attacked and wounded, and took refuge in
a house on the roadside. The temptation to make an end of his enemy was
too strong for Milo to resist. To have hurt Clodius would, he thought, be
as dangerous as to have made an end of him. His blood was up. The
"predestined victim," who had thwarted him for so many years, was within
his reach. The house was forced open. Clodius was dragged out bleeding,
and was despatched, and the body was left lying where he fell, where a
senator, named Sextus Tedius, who was passing an hour or two after, found
it, and carried it the same night to Rome. The little which is known of
Clodius comes only through Cicero's denunciations, which formed or colored
later Roman traditions; and it is thus difficult to comprehend the
affection which the people felt for him; but of the fact there can be no
doubt at all; he was the representative of their political opinions, the
embodiment, next to Caesar, of their practical hopes; and his murder was
accepted as a declaration of an aristocratic war upon them, and the first
blow in another massacre. On the following day, in the winter morning, the
tribunes brought the body into the Forum. A vast crowd had collected to
see it, and it was easy to lash them into fury. They dashed in the doors
of the adjoining senate-house, they carried in the bier, made a pile of
chairs and benches and tables, and burnt all that remained of Clodius in
the ashes of the senate-house itself. The adjoining temples were consumed
in the conflagration. The Senate collected elsewhere. They put on a bold
front, they talked of naming an interrex--which they ought to have done
before--and of holding the elections instantly, now that Clodius was gone.
Milo still hoped, and the aristocracy still hoped for Milo. But the storm
was too furious. Pompey came in with a body of troops, restored order, and
took command of the city. The preparations for the election were quashed.
Pompey still declined the dictatorship, but he was named, or he named
himself, sole consul, and at once appointed a commission to inquire into
the circumstances of Milo's canvass, and the corruption which had gone
along with it. Milo himself was arrested and put on his trial for the
murder. Judges were chosen who could be trusted, and to prevent
intimidation the court was occupied by soldiers. Cicero undertook his
friend's defence, but was unnerved by the stern, grim faces with which he
was surrounded. The eloquent tongue forgot its office. He stammered,
blundered, and sat down.[19] The consul expectant was found guilty and
banished, to return a few years after like a hungry wolf in the civil war,
and to perish as he deserved. Pompey's justice was even-handed. He
punished Milo, but the senate-house and temples were not to be destroyed
without retribution equally severe. The tribunes who had led on the mob
were deposed, and suffered various penalties. Pompey acted with a
soldier's abhorrence of disorder, and, so far, he did what Caesar approved
and would himself have done in Pompey's place.

But there followed symptoms which showed that there were secret influences
at work with Pompey, and that he was not the man which he had been. He had
taken the consulate alone; but a single consul was an anomaly; as soon as
order was restored it was understood that he meant to choose a colleague;
and Senate and people were watching to see whom he would select as an
indication of his future attitude. Half the world expected that he would
name Caesar, but half the world was disappointed. He took Metellus Scipio,
who had been the Senate's second candidate by the side of Milo, and had
been as deeply concerned in bribery as Milo himself; shortly after, and
with still more significance, he replaced Julia by Metellus Scipio's
daughter, the widow of young Publius Crassus, who had fallen with his
father.

Pompey, however, did not break with Caesar, and did not appear to intend
to break with him. Communications passed between them on the matter of the
consulship. The tribunes had pressed him as Pompey's colleague. Caesar
himself, being then in the north of Italy, had desired, on being
consulted, that the demand might not be insisted on. He had work still
before him in Gaul which he could not leave unfinished; but he made a
request himself that must be noticed, since the civil war formally grew
out of it, and Pompey gave a definite pledge, which was afterwards broken.

One of the engagements at Lucca had been that, when Caesar's command
should have expired, he was to be again consul. His term had still three
years to run; but many things might happen in three years. A party in the
Senate were bent on his recall. They might succeed in persuading the
people to consent to it. And Caesar felt, as Pompey had felt before him,
that, in the unscrupulous humor of his enemies at Rome he might be
impeached or killed on his return, as Clodius had been, if he came back a
private citizen unprotected by office to sue for his election. Therefore
he had stipulated at Lucca that his name might be taken and that votes
might be given for him while he was still with his army. On Pompey's
taking the power into his hands, Caesar, while abandoning any present
claim to share it, reminded him of this understanding, and required at the
same time that it should be renewed in some authoritative form. The
Senate, glad to escape on any terms from the present conjunction of the
men whom they hoped to divide, appeared to consent. Cicero himself made a
journey to Ravenna to see Caesar about it and make a positive arrangement
with him. Pompey submitted the condition to the assembly of the people, by
whom it was solemnly ratified. Every precaution was observed which would
give the promise, that Caesar might be elected consul in his absence, the
character of a binding engagement.[20]

It was observed with some surprise that Pompey, not long after, proposed
and carried a law forbidding elections of this irregular kind, and
insisting freshly on the presence of the candidates in person. Caesar's
case was not reserved as an exception or in any way alluded to. And when a
question was asked on the subject, the excuse given was that it had been
overlooked by accident. Such accidents require to be interpreted by the
use which is made of them.


[1] _Ad Quintum Fratrem_, ii. 15.

[2] "Ego enim ne pilo quidem minus me amabo."--_Ibid_., ii. 16. Other
    editions read "te."

[3] "Videor id judicio facere: jam enim debeo: sed amore sum
    incensus."--_Ad Quintum Fratrem_, iii. 1.

[4] Ad Crassum. _Ad Familiares_, v. 8.

[5] Ad Lentulum. _Ad Fam_., i. 8.

[6] _Ibid_., i. 9.

[7] _De Provinciis Consularibus_.

[8] _To Atticus_, iv. 16.

[9] Pompey, as proconsul with a province, was residing outside the walls.

[10] _Ad Quintum fratrem_, iii. 4.

[11] _Ad Familiares_, i. 9.

[12] "Meum non modo animum, sed ne odium quidem esse liberum."--_Ad
    Quintum Fratrem_, iii. 5.

[13] See the story in a letter to Atticus, lib. iv. 16-17.

[14] _De Haruspicum Responsis_.

[15] "Angit unus Milo. Sed velim finem afferat consulatus: in quo enitar
    non minus, quam sum enisus in nostro."--_Ad Quintum Fratrem_,
    iii. 9.

[16] _Ad Familiares_, ii. 6.

[17] "Incidebantur jam domi leges quae nos nostris servis addicerent....
    Oppressisset omnia, possideret, teneret lege nova, quae est inventa
    apud eum cum reliquis legibus Clodianis. Servos nostros libertos suos
    fecisset."--_Pro Milone_, 32, 33. These strong expressions can
    hardly refer to a proposed enfranchisement of the libertini, or sons
    of freedmen, like Horace's father.

[18] "Caesaris potentiam suam esse dicebat.... An consules in praetore
    coercendo fortes fuissent? Primum, Milone occiso habuisset suos
    consules."--_Pro Milone_, 33.

[19] The _Oratio pro Milone_, published afterwards by Cicero, was the
    speech which he intended to deliver and did not.

[20] Suetonius, _De Vita Julii Caesaris_. Cicero again and again
    acknowledges in his letters to Atticus that the engagement had really
    been made. Writing to Atticus (vii. 1), Cicero says: "Non est locus ad
    tergiversandum. Contra Caesarem? Ubi illae sunt densae dexterae? Nam
    ut illi hoc liceret adjuvi rogatus ab ipso Ravennae de Caelio tribuno
    plebis. Ab ipso autem? Etiam a Cnaeo nostro in illo divino tertio
    consulatu. Aliter sensero?"




CHAPTER XIX.


The conquest of Gaul had been an exploit of extraordinary military
difficulty. The intricacy of the problem had been enhanced by the venom of
a domestic faction, to which the victories of a democratic general were
more unwelcome than national disgrace. The discomfiture of Crassus had
been more pleasant news to the Senate than the defeat of Ariovistus, and
the passionate hope of the aristocracy had been for some opportunity which
would enable them to check Caesar in his career of conquest and bring him
home to dishonor and perhaps impeachment. They had failed. The efforts of
the Gauls to maintain or recover their independence had been successively
beaten down, and at the close of the summer of 53 Caesar had returned to
the north of Italy, believing that the organization of the province which
he had added to the Empire was all that remained to be accomplished. But
Roman civilians had followed in the van of the armies. Roman traders had
penetrated into the towns on the Seine and the Loire, and the curious
Celts had learnt from them the distractions of their new rulers. Caesar's
situation was as well understood among the Aedui and the Sequani as in the
clubs and coteries of the capital of the Empire, and the turn of events
was watched with equal anxiety. The victory over Sabinus, sharply avenged
as it had been, kept alive the hope that their independence might yet be
recovered. The disaffection of the preceding summer had been trampled out,
but the ashes of it were still smouldering; and when it became known that
Clodius, who was regarded as Caesar's tribune, had been killed, that the
Senate was in power again, and that Italy was threatened with civil
convulsions, their passionate patriotism kindled once more into flame.
Sudden in their resolutions, they did not pause to watch how the balance
would incline. Caesar was across the Alps. Either he would be deposed, or
civil war would detain him in Italy. His legions were scattered between
Treves, Auxerre, and Sens, far from the Roman frontier. A simultaneous
rising would cut them off from support, and they could be starved out or
overwhelmed in detail, as Sabinus had been at Tongres and Cicero had
almost been at Charleroy. Intelligence was swiftly exchanged. The chiefs
of all the tribes established communications with each other. They had
been deeply affected by the execution of Acco, the patriotic leader of the
Carnutes. The death of Acco was an intimation that they were Roman
subjects, and were to be punished as traitors if they disobeyed a Roman
command. They buried their own dissensions. Except among the Aedui there
was no longer a Roman faction and a patriot faction. The whole nation was
inspired by a simultaneous impulse to snatch the opportunity, and unite in
a single effort to assert their freedom. The understanding was complete. A
day was fixed for a universal rising. The Carnutes began by a massacre
which would cut off possibility of retreat, and, in revenge for Acco,
slaughtered a party of Roman civilians who were engaged in business at
_Gien_.[1] A system of signals had been quietly arranged. The
massacre at Gien was known in a few hours in the south, and the Auvergne
country, which had hitherto been entirely peaceful, rose in reply, under a
young high-born chief named Vercingetorix. Gergovia, the principal town of
the Arverni, was for the moment undecided.[2] The elder men there, who
had known the Romans long, were against immediate action; but
Vercingetorix carried the people away with him. His name had not appeared
in the earlier campaigns, but his father had been a man of note beyond the
boundaries of Auvergne; and he must himself have had a wide reputation
among the Gauls, for everywhere, from the Seine to the Garonne, he was
accepted as chief of the national confederacy. Vercingetorix had high
ability and real organizing powers. He laid out a plan for the general
campaign. He fixed a contingent of men and arms which each tribe was to
supply, and failure brought instantaneous punishment. Mild offences were
visited with the loss of eyes or ears; neglect of a more serious sort with
death by fire in the wicker tower. Between enthusiasm and terror he had
soon an army at his command, which he could increase indefinitely at his
need. Part he left to watch the Roman province and prevent Caesar, if he
should arrive, from passing through. With part he went himself to watch
the Aedui, the great central race, where Roman authority had hitherto
prevailed unshaken, but among whom, as he well knew, he had the mass of
the people on his side. The Aedui were hesitating. They called their
levies under arms, as if to oppose him, but they withdrew them again; and
to waver at such a moment was to yield to the stream.

The Gauls had not calculated without reason on Caesar's embarrassments.
The death of Clodius had been followed by the burning of the senate-house
and by many weeks of anarchy. To leave Italy at such a moment might be to
leave it a prey to faction or civil war. His anxiety was relieved at last
by hearing that Pompey had acted, and that order was restored; and seeing
no occasion for his own interference, and postponing the agitation for his
second consulship, he hurried back to encounter the final and convulsive
effort of the Celtic race to preserve their liberties. The legions were as
yet in no danger. They were dispersed in the north of France, far from the
scene of the present rising, and the northern tribes had suffered too
desperately in the past years to be in a condition to stir without
assistance. But how was Caesar to join them? The garrisons in the province
could not be moved. If he sent for the army to come across to him,
Vercingetorix would attack them on the march, and he could not feel
confident of the result; while the line of the old frontier of the
province was in the hands of the insurgents, or of tribes who could not be
trusted to resist the temptation, if he passed through himself without
more force than the province could supply. But Caesar had a resource which
never failed him in the daring swiftness of his own movements. He sent for
the troops which were left beyond the Alps. He had a few levies with him
to fill the gaps in the old legions, and after a rapid survey of the
stations on the provincial frontier he threw himself upon the passes of
the Cevennes. It was still winter. The snow lay six feet thick on the
mountains, and the roads at that season were considered impracticable even
for single travellers. The Auvergne rebels dreamt of nothing so little as
of Caesar's coming upon them at such a time and from such a quarter. He
forced his way. He fell on them while they were lying in imagined
security, Vercingetorix and his army being absent watching the Aedui, and,
letting loose his cavalry, he laid their country waste. But Vercingetorix,
he knew, would fly back at the news of his arrival; and he had already
made his further plans. He formed a strong entrenched camp, where he left
Decimus Brutus in charge, telling him that he would return as quickly as
possible; and, unknown to any one, lest the troops should lose courage at
parting with him, he flew across through an enemy's country with a handful
of attendants to Vienne, on the Rhone, where some cavalry from the
province had been sent to wait for him. Vercingetorix, supposing him still
to be in the Auvergne, thought only of the camp of Brutus; and Caesar,
riding day and night through the doubtful territories of the Aedui,
reached the two legions which were quartered near Auxerre. Thence he sent
for the rest to join him, and he was at the head of his army before
Vercingetorix knew that only Brutus was in front of him. The Aedui, he
trusted, would now remain faithful. But the problem before him was still
most intricate. The grass had not begun to grow. Rapid movement was
essential to prevent the rebel confederacy from consolidating itself; but
rapid movements with a large force required supplies; and whence were the
supplies to come? Some risks had to be run, but to delay was the most
dangerous of all. On the defeat of the Helvetii, Caesar had planted a
colony of them at Gorgobines, near Nevers, on the Loire. These colonists,
called Boii, had refused to take part in the rising; and Vercingetorix,
turning in contempt from Brutus, had gone off to punish them. Caesar
ordered the Aedui to furnish his commissariat, sent word to the Boii that
he was coming to their relief, swept through the Senones, that he might
leave no enemy in his rear, and then advanced on Gien, where the Roman
traders had been murdered, and which the Carnutes still occupied in force.
There was a bridge there over the Loire, by which they tried to escape in
the night. Caesar had beset the passage. He took the whole of them
prisoners, plundered and burnt the town, gave the spoil to his troops, and
then crossed the river and went up to help the Boii. He took Nevers.
Vercingetorix, who was hastening to its relief, ventured his first battle
with him; but the cavalry, on which the Gauls most depended, were
scattered by Caesar's German horse. He was entirely beaten, and Caesar
turned next to Avaricum (Bourges), a rich and strongly fortified town of
the Bituriges. From past experience Caesar had gathered that the Gauls
were easily excited and as easily discouraged. If he could reduce Bourges,
he hoped that this part of the country would return to its allegiance.
Perhaps he thought that Vercingetorix himself would give up the struggle.
But he had to deal with a spirit and with a man different from any which
he had hitherto encountered. Disappointed in his political expectations,
baffled in strategy, and now defeated in open fight, the young chief of
the Arverni had only learnt that he had taken a wrong mode of carrying on
the war, and that he was wasting his real advantages. Battles in the field
he saw that he would lose. But the Roman numbers were limited, and his
were infinite. Tens of thousands of gallant young men, with their light,
active horses, were eager for any work on which he might set them. They
could scour the country far and wide. They could cut off Caesar's
supplies. They could turn the fields into a blackened wilderness before
him on whichever side he might turn. The hearts of the people were with
him. They consented to a universal sacrifice. They burnt their farmsteads.
They burnt their villages. Twenty towns (so called) of the Bituriges were
consumed in a single day. The tribes adjoining caught the enthusiasm. The
horizon at night was a ring of blazing fires. Vercingetorix was for
burning Bourges also; but it was the sacred home of the Bituriges, the one
spot which they implored to be allowed to save, the most beautiful city in
all Gaul. Rivers defended it on three sides, and on the fourth there were
swamps and marshes which could be passed only by a narrow ridge. Within
the walls the people had placed the best of their property, and
Vercingetorix, against his judgment, consented, in pity for their
entreaties, that Avaricum should be defended. A strong garrison was left
inside. Vercingetorix entrenched himself in the forests sixteen miles
distant, keeping watch over Caesar's communications. The place could only
be taken by regular approaches, during which the army had to be fed. The
Aedui were growing negligent. The feeble Boii, grateful, it seemed, for
Caesar's treatment of them, exerted themselves to the utmost, but their
small resources were soon exhausted. For many days the legions were
without bread. The cattle had been driven into the woods. It came at last
to actual famine.[3] "But not one word was heard from them," says
Caesar, "unworthy of the majesty of the Roman people or their own earlier
victories." He told them that if the distress became unbearable he would
raise the siege. With one voice they entreated him to persevere. They had
served many years with him, they said, and had never abandoned any
enterprise which they had undertaken. They were ready to endure any degree
of hardship before they would leave unavenged their countrymen who had
been murdered at Gien.

Vercingetorix, knowing that the Romans were in difficulties, ventured
nearer. Caesar surveyed his position. It had been well chosen behind a
deep morass. The legions clamored to be allowed to advance and attack him,
but a victory, he saw, would be dearly purchased. No condemnation could be
too severe for him, he said, if he did not hold the lives of his soldiers
dearer than his own interest,[4] and he led them back without indulging
their eagerness.

The siege work was unexpectedly difficult. The inhabitants of the Loire
country were skilled artisans, trained in mines and iron works. The walls,
built of alternate layers of stone and timber, were forty feet in
thickness, and could neither be burnt nor driven in with the ram. The town
could be taken only with the help of an agger--a bank of turf and fagots
raised against the wall of sufficient height to overtop the
fortifications. The weather was cold and wet, but the legions worked with
such a will that in twenty-five days they had raised their bank at last, a
hundred yards in width and eighty feet high. As the work drew near its end
Caesar himself lay out all night among the men, encouraging them. One
morning at daybreak he observed that the agger was smoking. The ingenious
Gauls had undermined it and set it on fire. At the same moment they
appeared along the walls with pitch-balls, torches, fagots, which they
hurled in to feed the flames. There was an instant of confusion, but
Caesar uniformly had two legions under arms while the rest were working.
The Gauls fought with a courage which called out his warm admiration. He
watched them at the points of greatest danger falling under the shots from
the scorpions, and others stepping undaunted into their places to fall in
the same way. Their valor was unavailing. They were driven in, and the
flames were extinguished; the agger was level with the walls, and defence
was no longer possible. The garrison intended to slip away at night
through the ruins to join their friends outside. The wailing of the women
was heard in the Roman camp, and escape was made impossible. The morning
after, in a tempest of rain and wind, the place was stormed. The
legionaries, excited by the remembrance of Gien and the long resistance,
slew every human being that they found, men, women, and children all
alike. Out of forty thousand who were within the walls, eight hundred
only, that had fled at the first sound of the attack, made their way to
the camp of Vercingetorix.

Undismayed by the calamity, Vercingetorix made use of it to sustain the
determination of his followers. He pointed out to them that he had himself
opposed the defence. The Romans had defeated them, not by superior
courage, but by superior science. The heart of the whole nation was united
to force the Romans out of Gaul, and they had only to persevere in a
course of action where science would be useless, to be sure of success in
the end. He fell back upon his own country, taking special care of the
poor creatures who had escaped from the carnage; and the effect of the
storming of Bourges was to make the national enthusiasm hotter and fiercer
than before.

The Romans found in the town large magazines of corn and other provisions,
which had been laid in for the siege, and Caesar remained there some days
to refresh his troops. The winter was now over. The Aedui were giving him
anxiety, and as soon as he could he moved to Decize, a frontier town
belonging to them on the Loire, almost in the very centre of France. The
anti-Roman faction were growing in influence. He called a council of the
principal persons, and, to secure the fidelity of so important a tribe, he
deposed the reigning chief and appointed another who had been nominated by
the Druids.[5] He lectured the Aedui on their duty, bade them furnish
him with ten thousand men, who were to take charge of the commissariat,
and then divided his army. Labienus, with four legions, was sent to
compose the country between Sens and Paris. He himself, with the remaining
six legions, ascended the right bank of the Allier towards Gergovia in
search of Vercingetorix. The bridges on the Allier were broken, but Caesar
seized and repaired one of them and carried his army over.

The town of Gergovia stood on a high plateau, where the rivers rise which
run into the Loire on one side and into the Dordogne on the other. The
sides of the hill are steep, and only accessible at a very few places, and
the surrounding neighborhood is broken with rocky valleys. Vercingetorix
lay in force outside, but in a situation where he could not be attacked
except at disadvantage, and with his communication with the fortress
secured. He was departing again from his general plan for the campaign in
allowing Gergovia to be defended; but it was the central home of his own
tribe, and the result showed that he was right in believing it to be
impregnable. Caesar saw that it was too strong to be stormed, and that it
could only be taken after long operations. After a few skirmishes he
seized a spur of the plateau which cut off the garrison from their
readiest water-supply, and he formed an entrenched camp upon it. He was
studying the rest of the problem when bad news came that the Aedui were
unsteady again. The ten thousand men had been raised as he had ordered,
but on their way to join him they had murdered the Roman officers in
charge of them, and were preparing to go over to Vercingetorix. Leaving
two legions to guard his works, he intercepted the Aeduan contingent, took
them prisoners, and protected their lives. In his absence Vercingetorix
had attacked the camp with determined fury. The fighting had been
desperate, and Caesar only returned in time to save it. The reports from
the Aedui were worse and worse. The patriotic faction had the upper hand,
and with the same passionate determination to commit themselves
irrevocably, which had been shown before at Gien, they had massacred every
Roman in their territory. It was no time for delaying over a tedious
siege: Caesar was on the point of raising it, when accident brought on a
battle under the walls. An opportunity seemed to offer itself of capturing
the place by escalade, which part of the army attempted contrary to
orders. They fought with more than their usual gallantry. The whole scene
was visible from the adjoining hills, the Celtic women, with long
streaming hair, wildly gesticulating on the walls. The Romans were driven
back with worse loss than they had yet met with in Gaul. Forty-six
officers and seven hundred men had been killed.

Caesar was never more calm than under a reverse. He addressed the legions
the next day. He complimented their courage, but he said it was for the
general and not for them to judge when assaults should be tried. He saw
the facts of the situation exactly as they were. His army was divided.
Labienus was far away with a separate command. The whole of Gaul was in
flames. To persevere at Gergovia would only be obstinacy, and he accepted
the single military failure which he met with when present in person
through the whole of his Gallic campaign.

Difficulties of all kinds were now thickening. Caesar had placed magazines
in Nevers, and had trusted them to an Aeduan garrison. The Aeduans burnt
the town and carried the stores over the Loire to their own strongest
fortress, Bibracte (Mont Beauvray). The river had risen from the melting
of the snows, and could not be crossed without danger; and to feed the
army in its present position was no longer possible. To retreat upon the
province would be a confession of defeat. The passes of the Cevennes would
be swarming with enemies, and Labienus with his four legions in the west
might be cut off. With swift decision he marched day and night to the
Loire. He found a ford where the troops could cross with the water at
their armpits. He sent his horse over and cleared the banks. The army
passed safely. Food enough and in plenty was found in the Aeduans'
country, and without waiting he pressed on toward Sens to reunite his
forces. He understood the Gauls, and foresaw what must have happened.

Labienus, when sent on his separate command, had made Sens his head-
quarters. All down the Seine the country was in insurrection. Leaving the
new Italian levies at the station, he went with his experienced troops
down the left bank of the river till he came to the Essonne. He found the
Gauls entrenched on the other side, and, without attempting to force the
passage, he marched back to Melun, where he repaired a bridge which the
Gauls had broken, crossed over, and descended without interruption to
Paris. The town had been burnt, and the enemy were watching him from the
further bank. At this moment he heard of the retreat from Gergovia, and of
the rebellion of the Aedui. Such news, he understood at once, would be
followed by a rising in Belgium. Report had said that Caesar was falling
back on the province. He did not believe it. Caesar, he knew, would not
desert him. His own duty, therefore, was to make his way back to Sens. But
to leave the army of Gauls to accompany his retreat across the Seine, with
the tribes rising on all sides, was to expose himself to the certainty of
being intercepted. "In these sudden difficulties," says Caesar, "he took
counsel from the valor of his mind." [6] He had brought a fleet of
barges with him from Melun. These he sent down unperceived to a point at
the bend of the river four miles below Paris, and directed them to wait
for him there. When night fell he detached a few cohorts with orders to go
up the river with boats as if they were retreating, splashing their oars,
and making as much noise as possible. He himself with three legions stole
silently in the darkness to his barges, and passed over without being
observed. The Gauls, supposing the whole army to be in flight for Sens,
were breaking up their camp to follow in boisterous confusion. Labienus
fell upon them, telling the Romans to fight as if Caesar was present in
person; and the courage with which the Gauls fought in their surprise only
made the overthrow more complete. The insurrection in the north-west was
for the moment paralysed, and Labienus, secured by his ingenious and
brilliant victory, returned to his quarters without further accident.
There Caesar came to him as he expected, and the army was once more
together.

Meanwhile the failure at Gergovia had kindled the enthusiasm of the
central districts into white-heat. The Aedui, the most powerful of all the
tribes, were now at one with their countrymen, and Bibracte became the
focus of the national army. The young Vercingetorix was elected sole
commander, and his plan, as before, was to starve the Romans out. Flying
bodies harassed the borders of the province, so that no reinforcements
could reach them from the south. Caesar, however, amidst his conquests had
the art of making staunch friends. What the province could not supply he
obtained from his allies across the Rhine, and he furnished himself with
bodies of German cavalry, which when mounted on Roman horses proved
invaluable. In the new form which the insurrection had assumed the Aedui
were the first to be attended to. Caesar advanced leisurely upon them,
through the high country at the rise of the Seine and the Marne, toward
Alesia, or Alice St. Reine. Vercingetorix watched him at ten miles'
distance. He supposed him to be making for the province, and his intention
was that Caesar should never reach it. The Celts at all times have been
fond of emphatic protestations. The young heroes swore a solemn oath that
they would not see wife or children or parents more till they had ridden
twice through the Roman army. In this mood they encountered Caesar in the
valley of the Vingeanne, a river which falls into the Saone, and they met
the fate which necessarily befell them when their ungovernable multitudes
engaged the legions in the open field. They were defeated with enormous
loss: not they riding through the Roman army, but themselves ridden over
and hewn down by the German horsemen and sent flying for fifty miles over
the hills into Alice St. Reine. Caesar followed close behind, driving
Vercingetorix under the lines of the fortress; and the siege of Alesia,
one of the most remarkable exploits in all military history, was at once
undertaken.

Alesia, like Gergovia, is on a hill sloping off all round, with steep and,
in places, precipitous sides. It lies between two small rivers, the Ose
and the Oserain, both of which fall into the Brenne, and thence into the
Seine. Into this peninsula, with the rivers on each side of him,
Vercingetorix had thrown himself with eighty thousand men. Alesia as a
position was impregnable except to famine. The water-supply was secure.
The position was of extraordinary strength. The rivers formed natural
trenches. Below the town to the east they ran parallel for three miles
through an open alluvial plain before they reached Brenne. In every other
direction rose rocky hills of equal height with the central plateau,
originally perhaps one wide table-land, through which the water had
ploughed out the valleys. To attack Vercingetorix where he had placed
himself was out of the question; but to blockade him there, to capture the
leader of the insurrection and his whole army, and so in one blow make an
end with it, on a survey of the situation seemed not impossible. The Gauls
had thought of nothing less than of being besieged. The provisions laid in
could not be considerable, and so enormous a multitude could not hold out
many days.

At once the legions were set to work cutting trenches or building walls as
the form of the ground allowed. Camps were formed at different spots, and
twenty-three strong block-houses at the points which were least
defensible. The lines where the circuit was completed were eleven miles
long. The part most exposed was the broad level meadow which spread out to
the west toward the Brenne river. Vercingetorix had looked on for a time,
not understanding what was happening to him. When he did understand it, he
made desperate efforts on his side to break the net before it closed about
him. But he could do nothing. The Gauls could not be brought to face the
Roman entrenchments. Their cavalry were cut to pieces by the German horse.
The only hope was in help from without, and before the lines were entirely
finished horsemen were sent out with orders to ride for their lives into
every district in Gaul and raise the entire nation. The crisis had come.
If the countrymen of Vercingetorix were worthy of their fathers, if the
enthusiasm with which they had risen for freedom was not a mere emotion,
but the expression of a real purpose, their young leader called on them to
come now, every man of them, and seize Caesar in the trap into which he
had betrayed himself. If, on the other hand, they were careless, if they
allowed him and his eighty thousand men to perish without an effort to
save them, the independence which they had ceased to deserve would be lost
forever. He had food, he bade the messengers say, for thirty days; by
thrifty management it might be made to last a few days longer. In thirty
days he should look for relief.

The horsemen sped away like the bearers of the fiery cross. Caesar learnt
from deserters that they had gone out, and understood the message which
they carried. Already he was besieging an army far outnumbering his own.
If he persevered, he knew that he might count with certainty on being
attacked by a second army immeasurably larger. But the time allowed for
the collection of so many men might serve also to prepare for their
reception. Vercingetorix said rightly that the Romans won their victories,
not by superior courage, but by superior science. The same power of
measuring the exact facts of the situation which determined Caesar to
raise the siege of Gergovia decided him to hold on at Alesia. He knew
exactly, to begin with, how long Vercingetorix could hold out. It was easy
for him to collect provisions within his lines which would feed his own
army a few days longer. Fortifications the same in kind as those which
prevented the besieged from breaking out would serve equally to keep the
assailants off. His plan was to make a second line of works--an exterior
line as well as an interior line; and as the extent to be defended would
thus be doubled, he made them of a peculiar construction, to enable one
man to do the work of two. There is no occasion to describe the rows of
ditches, dry and wet; the staked pitfalls; the cervi, pronged instruments
like the branching horns of a stag; the stimuli, barbed spikes
treacherously concealed to impale the unwary and hold him fast when
caught, with which the ground was sown in irregular rows; the vallus and
the lorica, and all the varied contrivances of Roman engineering genius.
Military students will read the particulars for themselves in Caesar's own
language. Enough that the work was done within the time, with the legions
in perfect good humor, and giving jesting names to the new instruments of
torture as Caesar invented them. Vercingetorix now and then burst out on
the working parties, but produced no effect. They knew what they were to
expect when the thirty days were out; but they knew their commander, and
had absolute confidence in his judgment.

Meanwhile, on all sides, the Gauls were responding to the call. From every
quarter, even from far-off parts of Belgium, horse and foot were streaming
along the roads. Commius of Arras, Caesar's old friend, who had gone with
him to Britain, was caught with the same frenzy, and was hastening among
the rest to help to end him. At last two hundred and fifty thousand of the
best fighting men that Gaul could produce had collected at the appointed
rendezvous, and advanced with the easy conviction that the mere impulse of
so mighty a force would sweep Caesar off the earth. They were late in
arriving. The thirty days had passed, and there were no signs of the
coming deliverers. Eager eyes were straining from the heights of the
plateau; but nothing was seen save the tents of the legions or the busy
units of men at work on the walls and trenches. Anxious debates were held
among the beleaguered chiefs. The faint-hearted wished to surrender before
they were starved. Others were in favor of a desperate effort to cut their
way through or die. One speech Caesar preserves for its remarkable and
frightful ferocity. A prince of Auvergne said that the Romans conquered to
enslave and beat down the laws and liberties of free nations under the
lictors' axes, and he proposed that sooner than yield they should kill and
eat those who were useless for fighting.

Vercingetorix was of noble nature. To prevent the adoption of so horrible
an expedient, he ordered the peaceful inhabitants, with their wives and
children, to leave the town. Caesar forbade them to pass his lines.
Cruel--but war is cruel; and where a garrison is to be reduced by famine
the laws of it are inexorable.

But the day of expected deliverance dawned at last. Five miles beyond the
Brenne the dust-clouds of the approaching host were seen, and then the
glitter of their lances and their waving pennons. They swam the river.
They filled the plain below the town. From the heights of Alesia the whole
scene lay spread under the feet of the besieged. Vercingetorix came down
on the slope to the edge of the first trench, prepared to cross when the
turn of battle should give him a chance to strike. Caesar sent out his
German horse, and stood himself watching from the spur of an adjoining
hill. The Gauls had brought innumerable archers with them. The horse
flinched slightly under the showers of arrows, and shouts of triumph rose
from the lines of the town; but the Germans rallied again, sent the
cavalry of the Gauls flying, and hewed down the unprotected archers.
Vercingetorix fell back sadly to his camp on the hill, and then for a day
there was a pause. The relieving army had little food with them, and, if
they acted at all, must act quickly. They spread over the country
collecting faggots to fill the trenches, and making ladders to storm the
walls. At midnight they began their assault on the lines in the plain; and
Vercingetorix, hearing by the cries that the work had begun, gave his own
signal for a general sally. The Roman arrangements had been completed long
before. Every man knew his post. The slings, the crossbows, the scorpions
were all at hand and in order. Mark Antony and Caius Trebonius had each a
flying division under them to carry help where the pressure was most
severe. The Gauls were caught on the cervi, impaled on the stimuli, and
fell in heaps under the bolts and balls which were poured from the walls.
They could make no impression, and fell back at daybreak beaten and
dispirited. Vercingetorix had been unable even to pass the moats and
trenches, and did not come into action till his friends had abandoned the
attack.

The Gauls had not yet taken advantage of their enormous numbers. Defeated
on the level ground, they next tried the heights. The Romans were
distributed in a ring now fourteen miles in extent. On the north side,
beyond the Ose, the works were incomplete, owing to the nature of the
ground, and their lines lay on the slope of the hills descending towards
the river. Sixty thousand picked men left the Gauls' camp before dawn;
they stole round by a distant route, and were allowed to rest concealed in
a valley till the middle of the day. At noon they came over the ridge at
the Romans' back; and they had the best of the position, being able to
attack from above. Their appearance was the signal for a general assault
on all sides, and for a determined sally by Vercingetorix from within.
Thus before, behind, and everywhere, the legions were assailed at the same
moment; and Caesar observes that the cries of battle in the rear are
always more trying to men than the fiercest onset upon them in front;
because what they cannot see they imagine more formidable than it is, and
they depend for their own safety on the courage of others.

Caesar had taken his stand where he could command the whole action. There
was no smoke in those engagements, and the scene was transparently
visible. Both sides felt that the deciding trial had come. In the plain
the Gauls made no more impression than on the preceding day. At the weak
point on the north the Romans were forced back down the slope, and could
not hold their positions. Caesar saw it, and sent Labienus with six
cohorts to their help. Vercingetorix had seen it also, and attacked the
interior lines at the same spot. Decimus Brutus was then despatched also,
and then Caius Fabius. Finally, when the fighting grew desperate, he left
his own station; he called up the reserves which had not yet been engaged,
and he rode across the field, conspicuous in his scarlet dress and with
his bare head, cheering on the men as he passed each point where they were
engaged, and hastening to the scene where the chief danger lay. He sent
round a few squadrons of horse to the back of the hills which the Gauls
had crossed in the morning. He himself joined Labienus. Wherever he went
he carried enthusiasm along with him. The legionaries flung away their
darts and rushed upon the enemy sword in hand. The cavalry appeared above
on the heights. The Gauls wavered, broke, and scattered. The German horse
were among them, hewing down the brave but now helpless patriots who had
come with such high hopes and had fought so gallantly. Out of the sixty
thousand that had sallied forth in the morning, all but a draggled remnant
lay dead on the hill-sides. Seventy-four standards were brought in to
Caesar. The besieged retired into Alice again in despair. The vast hosts
that were to have set them free melted away. In the morning they were
streaming over the country, making back for their homes, with Caesar's
cavalry behind them, cutting them down and capturing them in thousands.

The work was done. The most daring feat in the military annals of mankind
had been successfully accomplished. A Roman army which could not at the
utmost have amounted to fifty thousand men had held blockaded an army of
eighty thousand--not weak Asiatics, but European soldiers, as strong and
as brave individually as the Italians were; and they had defeated, beaten,
and annihilated another army which had come expecting to overwhelm them,
five times as large as their own.

Seeing that all was over, Vercingetorix called the chiefs about him. He
had gone into the war, he said, for no object of his own, but for the
liberty of his country. Fortune had gone against him; and he advised them
to make their peace, either by killing him and sending his head to the
conqueror or by delivering him up alive. A humble message of submission
was despatched to Caesar. He demanded an unconditional surrender, and the
Gauls, starving and hopeless, obeyed. The Roman general sat amidst the
works in front of the camp while the chiefs one by one were produced
before him. The brave Vercingetorix, as noble in his calamity as Caesar
himself in his success, was reserved to be shown in triumph to the
populace of Rome. The whole of his army were prisoners of war. The Aedui
and Arverni among them were set aside, and were dismissed after a short
detention for political reasons. The remainder were sold to the
contractors, and the proceeds were distributed as prize-money among the
legions. Caesar passed the winter at Bibracte, receiving the submission of
the chiefs of the Aedui and of the Auvergne. Wounds received in war soon
heal if gentle measures follow a victory. If tried by the manners of his
age, Caesar was the most merciful of conquerors. His high aim was, not to
enslave the Gauls, but to incorporate them in the Empire; to extend the
privileges of Roman citizens among them and among all the undegenerate
races of the European provinces. He punished no one. He was gracious and
considerate to all, and he so impressed the central tribes by his judgment
and his moderation that they served him faithfully in all his coming
troubles, and never more, even in the severest temptation, made an effort
to recover their independence.

[Sidenote B.C. 51.]
Much, however, remained to be done. The insurrection had shaken the whole
of Gaul. The distant tribes had all joined in it, either actively or by
sympathy; and the patriots who had seized the control, despairing of
pardon, thought their only hope was in keeping rebellion alive. During
winter they believed themselves secure. The Carnutes of the Eure and
Loire, under a new chief named Gutruatus,[7] and the Bituriges,
untaught by or savage at the fate of Bourges, were still defiant. When the
winter was at its deepest, Caesar suddenly appeared across the Loire. He
caught the country people unprepared, and captured them in their farms.
The swiftness of his marches baffled alike flight and resistance; he
crushed the whole district down, and he was again at his quarters in forty
days. As a reward to the men who had followed him so cheerfully in the
cold January campaign, he gave each private legionary 200 sesterces and
each centurion 2,000. Eighteen days' rest was all that he allowed himself,
and with fresh troops, and in storm and frost, he started for the
Carnutes. The rebels were to have no rest till they submitted. The
Bellovaci were now out also. The Remi alone of all the Gauls had continued
faithful in the rising of Vercingetorix. The Bellovaci, led by Commius of
Arras, were preparing to burn the territory of the Remi as a punishment.
Commius was not as guilty, perhaps, as he seemed. Labienus had suspected
him of intending mischief when he was on the Seine in the past summer, and
had tried to entrap and kill him. Anyway Caesar's first object was to show
the Gauls that no friends of Rome would be allowed to suffer. He invaded
Normandy; he swept the country. He drove the Bellovaci and the Carnutes to
collect in another great army to defend themselves; he set upon them with
his usual skill; and destroyed them. Commius escaped over the Rhine to
Germany. Gutruatus was taken. Caesar would have pardoned him; but the
legions were growing savage at these repeated and useless commotions, and
insisted on his execution. The poor wretch was flogged till he was
insensible, and his head was cut off by the lictor's axe.

All Gaul was now submissive, its spirit broken, and, as the event proved,
broken finally, except in the southwest. Eight years out of the ten of
Caesar's government had expired. In one corner of the country only the
dream still survived that, if the patriots could hold out till Caesar was
gone, Celtic liberty might yet have a chance of recovering itself. A
single tribe on the Dordogne, relying on the strength of a fortress in a
situation resembling that of Gergovia, persisted in resistance to the
Roman authority. The spirit of national independence is like a fire: so
long as a spark remains a conflagration can again be kindled, and Caesar
felt that he must trample out the last ember that was alive. Uxellodunum--
so the place was named--stood on an inaccessible rock, and was amply
provisioned. It could be taken only as Edinburgh Castle was once taken, by
cutting off its water; and the ingenious tunnel may still be seen by which
the Roman engineers tapped the spring supplied the garrison. They, too,
had then to yield, and the war in Gaul was over.

[Sidenote B.C. 50.]
The following winter Caesar spent at Arras. He wished to hand over his
conquests to his successor not only subdued, but reconciled, to
subjection. He invited the chiefs of all the tribes to come to him. He
spoke to them of the future which lay open to them as members of a
splendid Imperial State. He gave them magnificent presents. He laid no
impositions either on the leaders or their people, and they went to their
homes personally devoted to their conqueror, contented with their
condition, and resolved to maintain the peace which was now established--a
unique experience in political history. The Norman Conquest of England
alone in the least resembles it. In the spring of 50 Caesar went to Italy.
Strange things had happened meanwhile in Rome. So long as there was a hope
that Caesar would be destroyed by the insurrection, the ill-minded Senate
had waited to let the Gauls do the work for him. The chance was gone. He
had risen above his perils more brilliant than ever, and nothing now was
left to them but to defy and trample on him. Servius Galba, who was
favorable to Caesar, had stood for the consulship for 49, and had received
a majority of votes. The election was set aside. Two patricians, Lentulus
and Caius Marcellus, were declared chosen, and their avowed purpose was to
strip the conqueror of Gaul of his honors and rewards.[8] The people of
his own Cisalpine Province desired to show that they at least had no
sympathy with such envenomed animosities. In the colonies in Lombardy and
Venetia Caesar was received with the most passionate demonstrations of
affection. The towns were dressed out with flags and flowers. The
inhabitants crowded into the streets with their wives and children to look
at him as he passed. The altars smoked with offerings; the temples were
thronged with worshippers praying the immortal gods to bless the greatest
of the Romans. He had yet one more year to govern. After a brief stay he
rejoined his army. He spent the summer in organizing the administration of
the different districts and assigning his officers their various commands.
That he did not at this time contemplate any violent interference with the
Constitution may be proved by the distribution of his legions, which
remained stationed far away in Belgium and on the Loire.

[1] Above Orleans, on the Loire.

[2] Four miles from Clermont, on the Allier, in the Puy-de-Dome.

[3] "Extrema fames."--_De Bell. Gall_., vii. 17.

[4] "Summa se iniquitatis condemnari debere nisi eorum vitam sua salute
    habeat cariorem."

[5] _De Bell. Gall_., vii. 33.

[6] "Tantis subito difficultatibus objectis ab animi virtute consilium
    petebat."

[7] Gudrund? The word has a German sound.

[8] "Insolenter adversarii sui gloriabantur L. Lentulum et C. Marcellum
    consules creatos, qui omnem honorem et dignitatem Caesaris
    exspoliarent. Ereptum Servio Galbae consulatum cum is multo plus
    gratia, suffragiisque valuisset, quod sibi conjunctus et
    familiaritate et necessitudine legationis esset."--_Auli Hirtii
    De Bell. Gall_. viii. 50.




CHAPTER XX.


[Sidenote: B.C. 51.]
Crassus had been destroyed by the Parthians. The nomination of his
successor lay with the Senate, and the Senate gave a notable evidence of
their incapacity for selecting competent governors for the provinces by
appointing in his place Caesar's old colleague, Bibulus. In their whole
number there was no such fool as Bibulus. When he arrived in Syria he shut
himself into a fortified town, leaving the Parthians to plunder and burn
at their pleasure. Cicero mocked at him. The Senate thanked him for his
distinguished services. The few serious men in Rome thought that Caesar or
Pompey should be sent out;[1] or, if they could not be spared, at least
one of the consuls of the year--Sulpicius Rufus or Marcus Marcellus. But
the consuls were busy with home politics and did not wish to go, nor did
they wish that others should go and gather laurels instead of them.
Therefore nothing was done at all,[2] and Syria was left to fate and
Bibulus. The consuls and the aristocracy had, in fact, more serious
matters to attend to. Caesar's time was running out, and when it was over
he had been promised the consulship. That consulship the faction of the
conservatives had sworn that he should never hold. Cato was threatening
him with impeachment, blustering that he should be tried under a guard, as
Milo had been.[3] Marcellus was saying openly that he would call him
home in disgrace before his term was over. Como, one of the most thriving
towns in the north of Italy, had been enfranchised by Caesar. An eminent
citizen from Como happening to be at Rome, Marcellus publicly flogged him,
and bade him go back and tell his fellow-townsmen the value of Caesar's
gift to them, Cicero saw the folly of such actions;[4] but the
aristocracy were mad--mad with pride and conscious guilt and fear. The ten
years of Caesar's government would expire at the end of 49. The engagement
had been entered into that he was to see his term out with his army and to
return to Rome for 48--as consul. They remembered his first consulship and
what he had done with it, and the laws which he had passed--laws which
they could not repeal; yet how had they observed them? If he had been too
strong for them all when he was but one of themselves, scarcely known
beyond the Forum and senate-house, what would he do now, when he was
recognized as the greatest soldier which Rome had produced, the army, the
people, Italy, the provinces all adoring his name? Consul again he could
not, must not be. Yet how could it be prevented? It was useless now to
bribe the Comitia, to work with clubs and wire-pullers. The enfranchised
citizens would come to vote for Caesar from every country town. The
legionaries to a man would vote for him; and even in the venal city he was
the idol of the hour. No fault could be found with his administration. His
wars had paid their own expenses. He had doubled the pay of his troops,
but his military chest was still full, and his own wealth seemed
boundless. He was adorning the Forum with new and costly buildings.
Senators, knights, young men of rank who had been extravagant, had been
relieved by his generosity and were his pensioners. Gaul might have been
impatient at its loss of liberty, but no word of complaint was heard
against Caesar for oppressive government. The more genius he had shown the
more formidable he was. Let him be consul, and he would be the master of
them all.

Caesar had been credited with far-reaching designs. It has been assumed
that in early life he had designed the overthrow of the Constitution; that
he pursued his purpose steadily through every stage in his career, and
that he sought the command of Gaul only to obtain an army devoted to him
which would execute his will. It has not seemed incredible that a man of
middle age undertook the conquest of a country of which nothing is known
save that it was inhabited by warlike races, who more than once had
threatened to overrun Italy and destroy Rome; that he went through ten
years of desperate fighting exposed to a thousand dangers from the sword,
from exposure and hardship; that for ten years he had banished himself
from Rome, uncertain whether he would ever see it again; and that he had
ventured upon all this with no other object than that of eventually
controlling domestic politics. A lunatic might have entertained such a
scheme, but not a Caesar. The Senate knew him. They knew what he had done.
They knew what he would now do, and for this reason they feared and hated
him. Caesar was a reformer. He had long seen that the Roman Constitution
was too narrow for the functions which had fallen to it, and that it was
degenerating into an instrument of tyranny and injustice. The courts of
law were corrupt; the elections wore corrupt. The administration of the
provinces was a scandal and a curse. The soil of Italy had become a
monopoly of capitalists, and the inhabitants of it a population of slaves.
He had exerted himself to stay the mischief at its fountain, to punish
bribery, to punish the rapacity of proconsuls and propraetors, to purify
the courts, to maintain respect for the law. He had endeavored to extend
the franchise, to raise the position of the liberated slaves, to replace
upon the land a free race of Roman citizens. The old Roman sentiment, the
consciousness of the greatness of the country and of its mighty destinies,
was chiefly now to be found in the armies. In the families of veteran
legionaries, spread in farms over Italy and the provinces, the national
spirit might revive; and, with a due share of political power conceded to
them, an enlarged and purified constituency might control the votes of the
venal populace of the city. These were Caesar's designs, so far as could
have been gathered from his earlier actions; but the manipulation of
elections, the miserable contests with disaffected colleagues and a
hostile Senate, were dreary occupations for such a man as he was. He was
conscious of powers which in so poor a sphere could find no expression. He
had ambition doubtless--plenty of it--ambition not to pass away without
leaving his mark on the history of his country. As a statesman he had done
the most which could be done when he was consul the first time, and he had
afterward sought a free field for his adventurous genius in a new country,
and in rounding off into security the frontiers of the 'Empire on the side
where danger was most threatening. The proudest self-confidence could not
have allowed him at his time of life to calculate on returning to Rome to
take up again the work of reformation.

But Cesar had conquered. He had made a name for himself as a soldier
before which the Scipios and the Luculluses, the Syllas and Pompeys paled
their glory. He was coming back to lay at his country's feet a province
larger than Spain--not subdued only, but reconciled to subjugation; a
nation of warriors, as much devoted to him as his own legions. The
aristocracy had watched his progress with the bitterest malignity. When he
was struggling with the last spasms of Gallic liberty, they had talked in
delighted whispers of his reported ruin.[5] But his genius had risen
above his difficulties and shone out more glorious than before. When the
war was over the Senate had been forced to vote twenty days of
thanksgiving. Twenty days were not enough for Roman, enthusiasm. The
people made them into sixty.

If Caesar came to Rome as consul, the Senate knew too well what it might
expect. What he had been before he would be again, but more severe as his
power was greater. Their own guilty hearts perhaps made them fear another
Marian proscription. Unless his command could be brought to an end in some
far different form, their days of power were numbered, and the days of
inquiry and punishment would begin.

[Sidenote: B.C. 50.]
Cicero had for some time seen what was coming. He had preferred
characteristically to be out of the way at the moment when he expected
that the storm would break, and had accepted the government of Cilicia and
Cyprus. He was thus absent while the active plot was in preparation. One
great step had been gained--the Senate had secured Pompey. Caesar's
greatness was too much for him. He could never again hope to be the first
on the popular side, and he preferred being the saviour of the
Constitution to playing second to a person whom he had patronized. Pompey
ought long since to have been in Spain with his troops; but he had stayed
at Rome to keep order, and he had lingered on with the same pretext. The
first step was to weaken Caesar and to provide Pompey with a force in
Italy. The Senate discovered suddenly that Asia Minor was in danger from,
the Parthians. They voted that Caesar and Pompey must each spare a legion
for the East. Pompey gave as his part the legion which he had lent to
Caesar for the last campaign. Caesar was invited to restore it and to
furnish another of his own. Caesar was then in Belgium. He saw the object
of the demand perfectly clearly; but he sent the two legions without a
word, contenting himself with making handsome presents to the officers and
men on their leaving him. When they reached Italy the Senate found that
they were wanted for home service, and they were placed under Pompey's
command in Campania. The consuls chosen for the year 49 were Lucius
Cornelius Lentulus and Caius Marcellus, both of them Caesar's open
enemies. Caesar himself had been promised the consulship (there could be
no doubt of his election, if his name was accepted in his absence) for the
year 48. He was to remain with his troops till his term had run out, and
to be allowed to stand while still in command. This was the distinct
engagement which the assembly had ratified. After the consular election
had been secured in the autumn of 50 to the conservative candidates, it
was proposed that by a displacement of dates Caesar's government should
expire, not at the close of the tenth year, but in the spring, on the 1st
of March. Convenient constitutional excuses were found for the change. On
the 1st of March he was to cease to be governor of Gaul. A successor was
to be named to take over his army. He would then have to return to Rome,
and would lie at the mercy of his enemies. Six months would intervene
before the next elections, during which he might be impeached,
incapacitated, or otherwise disposed of; while Pompey and his two legions
could effectually prevent any popular disturbance in his favor. The Senate
hesitated before decisively voting the recall. An intimation was conveyed
to Caesar that he had been mistaken about his term, which would end sooner
than he had supposed; and the world was waiting to see how he would take
it. Atticus thought that he would give way. His having parted so easily
with two legions did not look like resistance. Marcus Caelius, a
correspondent of Cicero, who had been elected praetor for 49, and kept his
friend informed how things were going on, wrote in the autumn:

"All is at a standstill about the Gallic government. The subject has been
raised, and is again postponed. Pompey's view is plain that Caesar must
leave his province after the 1st of March ... but he does not think that
before that time the Senate can properly pass a resolution about it. After
the 1st of March he will have no hesitation. When he was asked what he
would do if a tribune interposed, he said it made no difference whether
Caesar himself disobeyed the Senate or provided some one else to interfere
with the Senate. Suppose, said one, Caesar wishes to be consul and to keep
his army. Pompey answered, 'What if my son wishes to lay a stick on my
back'.... It appears that Caesar will accept one or other of two
conditions: either to remain in his province, and postpone his claim for
the consulship; or, if he can be named for the consulship, then to retire.
Curio is all against him. What he can accomplish, I know not; but I
perceive this, that if Caesar means well, he will not be
overthrown." [6]

The object of the Senate was either to ruin Caesar, if he complied with
this order, or to put him in the wrong by provoking him to disobedience.
The scheme was ingenious; but if the Senate could mine, Caesar could
countermine. Caelius said that Curio was violent against him: and so Curio
had been. Curio was a young man of high birth, dissolute, extravagant, and
clever. His father, who had been consul five-and-twenty years before, was
a strong aristocrat and a close friend of Cicero's. The son had taken the
same line; but, among other loose companions, he had made the
acquaintance, to his father's regret, of Mark Antony, and though they had
hitherto been of opposite politics, the intimacy had continued. The
Senate's influence had made Curio tribune for the year 49. Antony had been
chosen tribune also. To the astonishment of everybody but Cicero, it
appeared that these two, who were expected to neutralize each other, were
about to work together, and to veto every resolution which seemed an
unfair return for Caesar's services. Scandal said that young Curio was in
money difficulties, and that Caesar had paid his debts for him. It was
perhaps a lie invented by political malignity; but if Curio was
purchasable, Caesar would not have hesitated to buy him. His habit was to
take facts as they were, and, when satisfied that his object was just, to
go the readiest way to it.

The desertion of their own tribune was a serious blow to the Senate.
Caelius, who was to be praetor, was inclining to think that Caesar would
win, and therefore might take his side also. The constitutional opposition
would then be extremely strong; and even Pompey, fiercely as he had
spoken, doubted what to do. The question was raised in the Senate, whether
the tribunes' vetoes were to be regarded. Marcellus, who had flogged the
citizen of Como, voted for defying them, but the rest were timid. Pompey
did not know his own mind.[7] Caelius's account of his own feelings in
the matter represented probably those of many besides himself.

"In civil quarrels," he wrote to Cicero, "we ought to go with the most
honest party, as long as the contest lies within constitutional limits.
When it is an affair of camps and battles, we must go with the strongest.
Pompey will have the Senate and the men of consideration with him. All the
discontented will go with Caesar. I must calculate the forces on both
sides, before I decide on my own part." [8]

When the question next came on in the Senate, Curio, being of course
instructed in Caesar's wishes, professed to share the anxiety lest there
should be a military Dictatorship; but he said that the danger was as
great from Pompey as from Caesar. He did not object to the recall of
Caesar, but Pompey, he thought, should resign his province also, and the
Constitution would then be out of peril. Pompey professed to be willing,
if the Senate desired it; but he insisted that Caesar must take the first
step. Curio's proposal was so fair, that it gained favor both in Forum and
Senate. The populace, who hated Pompey, threw flowers upon the tribune as
he passed. Marcellus, the consul, a few days later, put the question in
the Senate: Was Caesar to be recalled? A majority answered Yes. Was Pompey
to be deprived of his province? The same majority said No. Curio then
proposed that both Pompey and Caesar should dismiss their armies. Out of
three hundred and ninety-two senators present, three hundred and seventy
agreed. Marcellus told them bitterly that they had voted themselves
Caesar's slaves. But they were not all insane with envy and hatred, and in
the midst of their terrors they retained some prudence, perhaps some
conscience and sense of justice. By this time, however, the messengers who
had been sent to communicate the Senate's views to Caesar had returned.
They brought no positive answer from himself; but they reported that
Caesar's troops were worn out and discontented, and certainly would refuse
to support him in any violent action. How false their account of the army
was, the Senate had soon reason to know; but it was true that one, and he
the most trusted officer that Caesar had, Labienus, who had fought through
so many battles with him in the Forum as well as in the field, whose high
talents and character his Commentaries could never praise sufficiently--it
was true that Labienus had listened to the offers made to him. Labienus
had made a vast fortune in the war. He perhaps thought, as other
distinguished officers have done, that he was the person that had won the
victories; that without him Caesar, who was being so much praised and
glorified, would have been nothing; and that he at least was entitled to
an equal share of the honors and rewards that might be coming; while if
Caesar was to be disgraced, he might have the whole recompense for
himself. Caesar heard of these overtures; but he had refused to believe
that Labienus could be untrue to him. He showed his confidence, and he
showed at the same time the integrity of his own intentions, by appointing
the officer who was suspected of betraying him Lieutenant-General of the
Cisalpine Province. None the less it was true that Labienus had been won
over. Labienus had undertaken for his comrades; and the belief that Caesar
could not depend on his troops renewed Pompey's courage and gave heart to
the faction which wished to precipitate extremities. The aspect of things
was now altered. What before seemed rash and dangerous might be safely
ventured. Caesar had himself followed the messengers to Ravenna. To raise
the passions of men to the desired heat, a report was spread that he had
brought his troops across and was marching on Rome. Curio hastened off to
him, to bring back under his own hand a distinct declaration of his views.

It was at this crisis, in the middle of the winter 50-49, that Cicero
returned to Rome. He had held his government but for two years, and
instead of escaping the catastrophe, he found himself plunged into the
heart of it. He had managed his province well. No one ever suspected
Cicero of being corrupt or unjust. He had gained some respectable
successes in putting down the Cilician banditti. He had been named
imperator by his soldiers in the field after an action in which he had
commanded; he had been flattering himself with the prospect of a triumph,
and had laid up money to meet the cost of it. The quarrel between the two
great men whom he had so long feared and flattered, and the necessity
which might be thrown on him of declaring publicly on one side or the
other, agitated him terribly. In October, as he was on his way home, he
expressed his anxieties with his usual frankness to Atticus.

"Consider the problem for me," he said, "as it affects myself: you advised
me to keep on terms both with Pompey and Caesar. You bade me adhere to one
because he had been good to me, and to the other because he was strong. I
have done so. I so ordered matters that no one could be dearer to either
of them than I was. I reflected thus: while I stand by Pompey, I cannot
hurt the Commonwealth; if I agree with Caesar, I need not quarrel with
Pompey; so closely they appeared to be connected. But now they are at a
sharp issue. Each regards me as his friend, unless Caesar dissembles;
while Pompey is right in thinking that what he proposes I shall approve. I
heard from both at the time at which I heard from you. Their letters were
most polite. What am I to do? I don't mean in extremities. If it comes to
fighting, it will be better to be defeated with one than to conquer with
the other. But when I arrive at Rome, I shall be required to say if Caesar
is to be proposed for the consulship in his absence, or if he is to
dismiss his army. What must I answer? Wait till I have consulted Atticus?
That will not do. Shall I go against Caesar? Where are Pompey's resources?
I myself took Caesar's part about it. He spoke to me on the subject at
Ravenna. I recommended his request to the tribunes as a reasonable one.
Pompey talked with me also to the same purpose. Am I to change my mind? I
am ashamed to oppose him now. Will you have a fool's opinion? I will apply
for a triumph, and so I shall have an excuse for not entering the city.
You will laugh. But oh, I wish I had remained in my province. Could I but
have guessed what was impending! Think for me. How shall I avoid
displeasing Caesar? He writes most kindly about a 'Thanksgiving' for my
success." [9]

Caesar had touched the right point in congratulating Cicero on his
military exploits. His friends in the Senate had been less delicate.
Bibulus had. been thanked for hiding from the Parthians. When Cicero had
hinted his expectations, the Senate had passed to the order of the day.

"Cato," he wrote, "treats me scurvily. He gives me praise for justice,
clemency, and integrity, which I did not want. What I did want he will not
let me have. Caesar promises me everything.--Cato has given a twenty days'
thanksgiving to Bibulus. Pardon me, if this is more than I can bear.--But
I am relieved from my worst fear. The Parthians have left Bibulus half
alive." [10]

The shame wore off as Cicero drew near to Rome. He blamed the tribunes for
insisting on what he had himself declared to be just. "Any way," he said,
"I stick to Pompey. When they say to me, Marcus Tullius, what do you
think? I shall answer, I go with Pompey; but privately I shall advise
Pompey to come to terms.--We have to do with a man full of audacity and
completely prepared. Every felon, every citizen who is in disgrace or
ought to be in disgrace, almost all the young, the city mob, the tribunes,
debtors, who are more numerous than I could have believed, all these are
with Caesar. He wants nothing but a good cause, and war is always
uncertain." [11]

Pompey had been unwell at the beginning of December, and had gone for a
few days into the country. Cicero met him on the 10th. "We were two hours
together," he said. "Pompey was delighted at my arrival. He spoke of my
triumph, and promised to do his part. He advised me to keep away from the
Senate, till it was arranged, lest I should offend the tribunes. He spoke
of war as certain. Not a word did he utter pointing to a chance of
compromise.--My comfort is that Caesar, to whom even his enemies had
allowed a second consulship, and to whom fortune had given so much power,
will not be so mad as to throw all this away." [12] Cicero had soon to
learn that the second consulship was not so certain. On the 29th he had
another long conversation with Pompey.

"Is there hope of peace?" he wrote, in reporting what had passed. "So far
as I can gather from his very full expressions to me, he does not desire
it. For he thinks thus: If Caesar be made consul, even after he has parted
from his army, the constitution will be at an end. He thinks also that
when Caesar hears of the preparations against him, he will drop the
consulship for this year, to keep his province and his troops. Should he
be so insane as to try extremities, Pompey holds him in utter contempt. I
thought, when he was speaking, of the uncertainties of war; but I was
relieved to hear a man of courage and experience talk like a statesman of
the dangers of an insincere settlement.--Not only he does not seek for
peace, but he seems to fear it.--My own vexation is, that I must pay
Caesar my debt, and spend thus what I had set apart for my triumph. It is
indecent to owe money to a political antagonist." [13]

Events were hurrying on. Cicero entered Rome the first week in January, to
find that the Senate had begun work in earnest. Curio had returned from
Ravenna with a letter from Caesar. He had offered three alternatives.
First, that the agreement already made might stand, and that he might be
nominated, in his absence, for the consulship; or that when he left his
army, Pompey should disband his Italian legions; or, lastly, that he
should hand over Transalpine Gaul to his successor, with eight of his ten
legions, himself keeping the north of Italy and Illyria with two, until
his election. It was the first of January. The new consuls, Lentulus and
Caius Marcellus, with the other magistrates, had entered on their offices,
and were in their places in the Senate. Pompey was present, and the letter
was introduced. The consuls objected to it being read, but they were
overruled by the remonstrances of the tribunes. The reading over, the
consuls forbade a debate upon it, and moved that the condition of the
Commonwealth should be taken into consideration. Lentulus, the more
impassioned of them, said that if the Senate would be firm, he would do
his duty; if they hesitated and tried conciliation, he should take care of
himself, and go over to Caesar's side. Metellus Scipio, Pompey's father-
in-law, spoke to the same purpose. Pompey, he said, was ready to support
the constitution, if the Senate were resolute. If they wavered, they would
look in vain for future help from him. Marcus Marcellus, the consul of the
preceding year, less wild than he had been when he flogged the Como
citizen, advised delay, at least till Pompey was better prepared.
Calidius, another senator, moved that Pompey should go to his province.
Caesar's resentment at the detention of the two legions from the Parthian
war he thought, was natural and justifiable. Marcus Rufus agreed with
Calidius. But moderation was borne down by the violence of Lentulus; and
the Senate, in spite of themselves,[14] voted, at Scipio's dictation,
that Caesar must dismiss his army before a day which was to be fixed, or,
in default, would be declared an enemy to the State. Two tribunes, Mark
Antony and Cassius Longinus, interposed. The tribunes' veto was as old as
their institution. It had been left standing even by Sylla. But the
aristocracy were declaring war against the people. They knew that the veto
was coming, and they had resolved to disregard it. The more passionate the
speakers, the more they were cheered by Caesar's enemies. The sitting
ended in the evening without a final conclusion; but at a meeting
afterwards, at his house, Pompey quieted alarms by assuring the senators
that there was nothing to fear. Caesar's army he knew to be disaffected.
He introduced the officers of the two legions that had been taken from
Caesar, who vouched for their fidelity to the constitution. Some of
Pompey's veterans were present, called up from their farms; they were
enthusiastic for their old commander. Piso, Caesar's father-in-law, and
Roscius, a praetor, begged for a week's delay, that they might go to
Caesar, and explain the Senate's pleasure. Others proposed to send a
deputation to soften the harshness of his removal. But Lentulus, backed by
Cato, would listen to nothing. Cato detested Caesar as the representative
of everything which he most abhorred. Lentulus, bankrupt and loaded with
debts, was looking for provinces to ruin, and allied sovereigns to lay
presents at his feet. He boasted that he would be a second Sylla.[15]
When the Senate met again in their places, the tribunes' veto was
disallowed. They ordered a general levy through Italy. The consuls gave
Pompey the command-in-chief, with the keys of the treasury. The Senate
redistributed the provinces; giving Syria to Scipio, and in Caesar's place
appointing Domitius Ahenobarbus, the most inveterate and envenomed of his
enemies. Their authority over the provinces had been taken from them by
law, but law was set aside. Finally, they voted the State in danger,
suspended the constitution, and gave the consuls absolute power.

The final votes were taken on the 7th of January. A single week had
sufficed for a discussion of the resolutions on which the fate of Rome
depended. The Senate pretended to be defending the constitution. They had
themselves destroyed the constitution, and established on the ruins of it
a senatorial oligarchy. The tribunes fled at once to Caesar. Pompey left
the city for Campania, to join his two legions and superintend the levies.

The unanimity which had appeared in the Senate's final determination was
on the surface only. Cicero, though present in Rome, had taken no part,
and looked on in despair. The "good" were shocked at Pompey's
precipitation. They saw that a civil war could end only in a despotism.
[16] "I have not met one man," Cicero said, "who does not think it would
be better to make concessions to Caesar than to fight him.--Why fight now?
Things are no worse than when we gave him his additional five years, or
agreed to let him be chosen consul in his absence. You wish for my
opinion. I think we ought to use every means to escape war. But I must say
what Pompey says. I cannot differ from Pompey." [17]

A day later, before the final vote had been taken, he thought still that
the Senate was willing to let Caesar keep his province, if he would
dissolve his army. The moneyed interests, the peasant landholders, were
all on Caesar's side; they cared not even if monarchy came so that they
might have peace. "We could have resisted Caesar easily when he was weak,"
he wrote. "Now he has eleven legions and as many cavalry as he chooses
with him, the Cisalpine provincials, the Roman populace, the tribunes, and
the hosts of dissolute young men. Yet we are to fight with him, or take
account of him unconstitutionally. Fight, you say, rather than be a slave.
Fight for what? To be proscribed, if you are beaten; to be a slave still,
if you win. What will you do then? you ask. As the sheep follows the flock
and the ox the herd, so will I follow the 'good,' or those who are called
good, but I see plainly what will come out of this sick state of ours. No
one knows what the fate of war may be. But if the 'good' are beaten, this
much is certain, that Caesar will be as bloody as Cinna, and as greedy of
other men's properties as Sylla." [18]

Once more, and still in the midst of uncertainty:

"The position is this: We must either let Caesar stand for the consulship,
he keeping his army with the Senate's consent, or supported by the
tribunes; or we must persuade him to resign his province and his army, and
so to be consul; or if he refuses, the elections can be held without him,
he keeping his province; or if he forbids the election through the
tribunes, we can hang on and come to an interrex; or, lastly, if he brings
his army on us, we can fight. Should this be his choice, he will either
begin at once, before we are ready, or he will wait till his election,
when his friends will put in his name and it will not be received. His
plea may then be the ill-treatment of himself, or it may be complicated
further should a tribune interpose and be deprived of office, and so take
refuge with him.... You will say persuade Caesar, then, to give up his
army, and be consul. Surely, if he will agree, no objection can be raised;
and if he is not allowed to stand while he keeps his army, I wonder that
he does not let it go. But a certain person (Pompey) thinks that nothing
is so much to be feared as that Caesar should be consul. Better thus, you
will say, than with an army. No doubt. But a certain person holds that his
consulship would be an irremediable misfortune. We must yield if Caesar
will have it so. He will be consul again, the same man that he was before;
then, weak as he was, he proved stronger than the whole of us. What, think
you, will he be now? Pompey, for one thing, will surely be sent to Spain.
Miserable every way; and the worst is, that Caesar cannot be refused, and
by consenting will be taken into supreme favor by all the 'good.' They
say, however, that he cannot be brought to this. Well, then, which is the
worst of the remaining alternatives? Submit to what Pompey calls an
impudent demand? Caesar has held his province for ten years. The Senate
did not give it him. He took it himself by faction and violence. Suppose
he had it lawfully, the time is up. His successor is named. He disobeys.
He says that he ought to be considered. Let him consider us. Will he keep
his army beyond the time for which the people gave it to him, in despite
of the Senate? We must fight him then, and, as Pompey says, we shall
conquer or die free men. If fight we must, time will show when or how. But
if you have any advice to give, let me know it, for I am tormented day and
night." [19]

These letters give a vivid picture of the uncertainties which distracted
public opinion during the fatal first week of January. Caesar, it seems,
might possibly have been consul had he been willing to retire at once into
the condition of a private citizen, even though Pompey was still
undisarmed. Whether in that position he would have lived to see the
election-day is another question. Cicero himself, it will be seen, had
been reflecting already that there were means less perilous than civil war
by which dangerous persons might be got rid of. And there were weak points
in his arguments which his impatience passed over. Caesar held a positive
engagement about his consulship, which the people had ratified. Of the ten
years which the people had allowed him, one was unexpired, and the Senate
had no power to vote his recall without the tribunes' and the people's
consent. He might well hesitate to put himself in the power of a faction
so little scrupulous. It is evident, however, that Pompey and the two
consuls were afraid that, if such overtures were made to him by a
deputation from the Senate, he might perhaps agree to them; and by their
rapid and violent vote they put an end to the possibility of an
arrangement. Caesar, for no other crime than that as a brilliant
democratic general he was supposed dangerous to the oligarchy, had been
recalled from his command in the face of the prohibition of the tribunes,
and was declared an enemy of his country unless he instantly submitted.
After the experience of Marius and Sylla, the Senate could have paid no
higher compliment to Caesar's character than in believing that he would
hesitate over his answer.

[1] "Caelius ad Ciceronem," _Ad Fam_. viii. 10.

[2] _Ibid_.

[3] Suetonius, _De Vita Julii Caesaris_.

[4] "Marcellus foede do Comensi. Etsi ille magistratum non gesserat, erat
    tamen Transpadanus. Ita mihi videtur non minus stomachi nostro ac
    Caesari fecisse."--_To Atticus_, v. 11.

[5] "Quod ad Caesarem crebri et non belli de eo rumores. Sed susurratores
    dumtaxat veniunt.... Neque adhuc certi quidquam est, neque haec
    incerta tamen vulgo jactantur. Sed inter paucos, quos tu nosti,
    palam secreto narrantur. At Domitius cum manus ad os
    apposuit!"--Caelius to Cicero, _Ad Fam_. viii. 1.

[6] Caelius to Cicero, _Ad Fam_. viii. 8.

[7] _Ibid_., viii. 13.

[8] Caelius to Cicero, _Ad Fam_. viii. 14.

[9] _To Atticus_, vii. 1, abridged.

[10] _Ibid._, vii. 2.

[11] _Ibid._, vii. 3.

[12] _To Atticus_, vii. 4.

[13] "Mihi autem illud molestissimum est, quod solvendi sunt nummi
    Caesari, et instrumentum triumphi eo conferendum. Est [Greek: amorphon
    hantipoliteuomenou chreopheiletaen] esse."--_Ibid_., vii. 8.

[14] "Inviti et coacti" is Caesar's expression. He wished, perhaps, to
    soften the Senate's action. (_De Bello Civili_, i. 2.)

[15] "Seque alterum fore Sullam inter suos gloriatur."--_De Bello
    Civili_, i. 4.

[16] "Tum certe tyrannus existet."--_To Atticus_, vii. 5.

[17] _To Atticus_, vii. 6.

[18] _Ibid_., vii. 7, abridged.

[19] _To Atticus_, vii. 9, abridged.




CHAPTER XXI.


Caesar,  when the report of the Senate's action reached him, addressed his
soldiers. He had but one legion with him, the 13th. But one legion would
represent the rest. He told them what the Senate had done, and why they
had done it. "For nine years he and his army had served their country
loyally and with some success. They had driven the Germans over the Rhine;
they had made Gaul a Roman province; and the Senate for answer had broken
the constitution, and had set aside the tribunes because they spoke in his
defence. They had voted the State in danger, and had called Italy to arms
when no single act had been done by himself to justify them." The soldiers
whom--Pompey supposed disaffected declared with enthusiasm that they would
support their commander and the tribunes. They offered to serve without
pay. Officers and men volunteered contributions for the expenses of the
war. In all the army one officer alone proved false. Labienus kept his
word to Pompey and stole away to Capua. He left his effects behind, and
Caesar sent them after him untouched.

Finding that all the rest could be depended on, he sent back over the Alps
for two more legions to follow him. He crossed the little river Rubicon,
which bounded his province, and advanced to Rimini, where he met the
tribunes, Antony, Cassius Longinus, and Curio, who were coming to him from
Rome.[1] At Rimini the troops were again assembled. Curio told
them what had passed. Caesar added a few more words. The legionaries,
officers and privates, were perfectly satisfied; and Caesar, who, a
resolution once taken, struck as swiftly as his own eagles, was preparing
to go forward. He had but 5,000 men with him, but he understood the state
of Italy, and knew that he had nothing to fear. At this moment Lucius
Caesar, a distant kinsman, and the praetor Roscius arrived, as they said,
with a private message from Pompey. The message was nothing. The object
was no more than to gain time. But Caesar had no wish for war, and would
not throw away a chance of avoiding it. He bade his kinsman tell Pompey
that it was for him to compose the difficulties which had arisen without a
collision. He had been himself misrepresented to his countrymen. He had
been recalled from his command before his time; the promise given to him
about his consulship had been broken. He had endured these injuries. He
had proposed to the Senate that the forces on both sides should be
disbanded. The Senate had refused. A levy had been ordered through Italy,
and the legions designed for Parthia had been retained. Such an attitude
could have but one meaning. Yet he was still ready to make peace. Let
Pompey depart to Spain. His own troops should then be dismissed. The
elections could be held freely, and Senate and people would be restored to
their joint authority. If this was not enough, they two might meet and
relieve each other's alarms and suspicions in a personal interview.

With this answer the envoys went, and Caesar paused at Rimini. Meanwhile
the report reached Rome that Caesar had crossed the Rubicon. The
aristocracy had nursed the pleasant belief that his heart would fail him,
or that his army would desert him. His heart had not failed, his army had
not deserted; and, in their terror, they saw him already in their midst
like an avenging Marius. He was coming. His horse had been seen on the
Apennines. Flight, instant flight, was the only safety. Up they rose,
consuls, praetors, senators, leaving wives and children and property to
their fate, not halting even to take the money out of the treasury, but
contenting themselves with leaving it locked. On foot, on horseback, in
litters, in carriages, they fled for their lives to find safety under
Pompey's wing in Capua. In this forlorn company went Cicero, filled with
contempt for what was round him.

"You ask what Pompey means to do," he wrote to Atticus. "I do not think he
knows himself. Certainly none of us know.--It is all panic and blunder. We
are uncertain whether he will make a stand, or leave Italy. If he stays, I
fear his army is too unreliable. If not, where will he go, and how and
what are his plans? Like you, I am afraid that Caesar will be a Phalaris,
and that we may expect the very worst. The flight of the Senate, the
departure of the magistrates, the closing of the treasury, will not stop
him.--I am broken-hearted; so ill-advisedly, so against all my counsels,
the whole business has been conducted. Shall I turn my coat, and join the
victors? I am ashamed. Duty forbids me; but I am miserable at the thought
of my children." [2]

A gleam of hope came with the arrival of Labienus, but it soon clouded.
"Labienus is a hero," Cicero said. "Never was act more splendid. If
nothing else comes of it, he has at least made Caesar smart.--We have a
civil war on us, not because we have quarrelled among ourselves, but
through one abandoned citizen. But this citizen has a strong army, and a
large party attached to him.--What he will do I cannot say; he cannot even
pretend to do anything constitutionally; but what is to become of us, with
a general that cannot lead?--To say nothing of ten years of blundering,
what could have been worse than this flight from Rome? His next purpose I
know not. I ask, and can have no answer. All is cowardice and confusion.
He was kept at home to protect us, and protection there is none. The one
hope is in two legions invidiously detained and almost not belonging to
us. As to the levies, the men enlist unwillingly, and hate the notion of a
war." [3]

In this condition of things Lucius Caesar arrived with the answer from
Rimini. A council of war was held at Teano to consider it; and the flames
which had burnt so hotly at the beginning of the month were found to have
somewhat cooled. Cato's friend Favonius was still defiant; but the rest,
even Cato himself, had grown more modest. Pompey, it was plain, had no
army, and could not raise an army. Caesar spoke fairly. It might be only
treachery; but the Senate had left their families and their property in
Rome. The public money was in Rome. They were willing to consent that
Caesar should be consul, since so it must be. Unluckily for themselves,
they left Pompey to draw up their reply. Pompey intrusted the duty to an
incapable person named Sestius, and the answer was ill-written, awkward,
and wanting on the only point which would have proved his sincerity.
Pompey declined the proposed interview. Caesar must evacuate Rimini, and
return to his province; afterwards, at some time unnamed, Pompey would go
to Spain, and other matters should be arranged to Caesar's satisfaction.
Caesar must give securities that he would abide by his promise to dismiss
his troops; and meanwhile the consular levies would be continued.[4]

To Cicero these terms seemed to mean a capitulation clumsily disguised.
Caesar interpreted them differently. To him it appeared that he was
required to part with his own army, while Pompey was forming another. No
time was fixed for the departure to Spain. He might be himself named
consul, yet Pompey might be in Italy to the end of the year with an army
independent of him. Evidently there was distrust on both sides, yet on
Caesar's part a distrust not undeserved. Pompey would not see him. He had
admitted to Cicero that he desired a war to prevent Caesar from being
consul, and at this very moment was full of hopes and schemes for carrying
it on successfully. "Pompey writes," reported Cicero on the 28th of
January, "that in a few days he will have a force on which he can rely. He
will occupy Picenum,[5] and we are then to return to Rome. Labienus
assures him that Caesar is utterly weak. Thus he is in better spirits."
[6]

[Sidenote: February, B.C. 49.]
A second legion had by this time arrived at Rimini. Caesar considered that
if the Senate really desired peace, their disposition would be quickened
by further pressure. He sent Antony across the mountains to Arezzo, on the
straight road to Rome; and he pushed on himself toward Ancona, before
Pompey had time to throw himself in the way. The towns on the way opened
their gates to him. The municipal magistrates told the commandants that
they could not refuse to entertain Caius Caesar, who had done such great
things for the Republic. The officers fled. The garrisons joined Caesar's
legions. Even a colony planted by Labienus sent a deputation with offers
of service. Steadily and swiftly in gathering volume the army of the north
came on. At Capua all was consternation. "The consuls are helpless,"
Cicero said. "There has been no levy. The commissioners do not even try to
excuse their failure. With Caesar pressing forward and our general doing
nothing, men will not give in their names. The will is not wanting, but
they are without hope. Pompey, miserable and incredible though it be, is
prostrate. He has no courage, no purpose, no force, no energy.... Caius
Cassius came on the 7th to Capua, with an order from Pompey to the consuls
to go to Rome and bring away the money from the treasury. How are they to
go without an escort, or how return? The consuls say he must go himself
first to Picenum. But Picenum is lost.--Caesar will soon be in Apulia, and
Pompey on board ship. What shall I do? I should not doubt had there not
been such shameful mis-management, and had I been myself consulted. Caesar
invites me to peace, but his letter was written before his advance." [7]

Desperate at the lethargy of their commander, the aristocracy tried to
force him into movement by acting on their own account. Domitius, who had
been appointed Caesar's successor, was most interested in his defeat. He
gathered a party of young lords and knights and a few thousand men, and
flung himself into Corfinium, a strong position in the Apennines, directly
in Caesar's path. Pompey had still his two legions, and Domitius sent an
express to tell him that Caesar's force was still small, and that with a
slight effort he might enclose him in the mountains. Meanwhile Domitius
himself tried to break the bridge over the Pescara. He was too late.
Caesar had by this time nearly 30,000 men. The Cisalpine territories in
mere enthusiasm had raised twenty-two cohorts for him. He reached the
Pescara while the bridge was still standing. He surrounded Corfinium with
the impregnable lines which had served him so well in Gaul, and the
messenger sent to Capua came back with cold comfort. Pompey had simply
ordered Domitius to retreat from a position which he ought not to have
occupied, and to join him in Apulia. It was easy to say Retreat! No
retreat was possible. Domitius and his companions proposed to steal away
in the night. They were discovered. Their own troops arrested them, and
carried them as prisoners to Caesar. Fortune had placed in his hands at
the outset of the campaign the man who beyond others had been the occasion
of it. Domitius would have killed Caesar like a bandit if he had caught
him. He probably expected a similar fate for himself. Caesar received his
captives calmly and coldly. He told them that they had made an ungrateful
return to him for his services to his country; and then dismissed them
all, restoring even Domitius's well-filled military chest, and too proud
to require a promise from him that he would abstain personally from
further hostility. His army, such as it was, followed the general example,
and declared for Caesar.

The capture of Corfinium and the desertion of the garrison made an end of
hesitation. Pompey and the consuls thought only of instant flight, and
hurried to Brindisi, where ships were waiting for them; and Caesar, hoping
that the evident feeling of Italy would have its effect with the
reasonable part of the Senate, sent Cornelius Balbus, who was on intimate
terms with many of them, to assure them of his eagerness for peace, and to
tell Cicero especially that he would be well contented to live under
Pompey's rule if he could have a guarantee for his personal safety.[8]

[Sidenote: March B.C. 49.]
Cicero's trials had been great, and were not diminishing. The account
given by Balbus was simply incredible to him. If Caesar was really as well
disposed as Balbus represented, then the senatorial party, himself
included, had acted like a set of madmen. It might be assumed, therefore,
that Caesar was as meanly ambitious, as selfish, as revolutionary as their
fears had represented him, and that his mildness was merely affectation.
But what then? Cicero wished for himself to be on the right side, but also
to be on the safe side. Pompey's was the right side, the side, that is,
which, for his own sake, he would prefer to see victorious. But was
Pompey's the safe side? or rather, would it be safe to go against him? The
necessity for decision was drawing closer. If Pompey and the consuls went
abroad, all loyal senators would be expected to follow them, and to stay
behind would be held treason. Italy was with Caesar; but the East, with
its treasures, its fleets, its millions of men, this was Pompey's, heart
and soul. The sea was Pompey's. Caesar might win for the moment, but
Pompey might win in the long run. The situation was most perplexing.
Before the fall of Corfinium, Cicero had poured himself out upon it to his
friend. "My connections, personal and political," he said, "attach me to
Pompey. If I stay behind, I desert my noble and admirable companions, and
I fall into the power of a man whom I know not how far I can trust. He
shows in many ways that he wishes me well. I saw the tempest impending,
and I long ago took care to secure his good-will. But suppose him to be my
friend indeed, is it becoming in a good and valiant citizen, who has held
the highest offices and done such distinguished things, to be in the power
of any man? Ought I to expose myself to the danger, and perhaps disgrace,
which would lie before me, should Pompey recover his position? This on one
side; but now look at the other. Pompey has shown neither conduct nor
courage, and he has acted throughout against my advice and judgment. I
pass over his old errors: how he himself armed this man against the
constitution; how he supported his laws by violence in the face of the
auspices; how he gave him Further Gaul, married his daughter, supported
Clodius, helped me back from exile indeed, but neglected me afterward; how
he prolonged Caesar's command, and backed him up in everything; how in his
third consulship, when he had begun to defend the constitution, he yet
moved the tribunes to curry a resolution for taking Caesar's name in his
absence, and himself sanctioned it by a law of his own; how he resisted
Marcus Marcellus, who would have ended Caesar's government on the 1st of
March. Let us forget all this: but what was ever more disgraceful than the
flight from Rome? What conditions would not have been preferable? He will
restore the constitution, you say, but when? by what means? Is not Picenum
lost? Is not the road open to the city? Is not our money, public and
private, all the enemy's? There is no cause, no rallying point for the
friends of the constitution.... The rabble are all for Caesar, and many
wish for revolution.... I saw from the first that Pompey only thought of
flight: if I now follow him, whither are we to go? Caesar will seize my
brother's property and mine, ours perhaps sooner than others', as an
assault on us would be popular. If I stay, I shall do no more than many
good men did in Cinna's time.--Caesar may be my friend, not certainly, but
perhaps; and he may offer me a triumph which it would be dangerous to
refuse, and invidious with the "good" to accept. Oh, most perplexing
position!--while I write, word comes that Caesar is at Corfinium. Domitius
is inside, with a strong force and eager to fight. I cannot think Pompey
will desert him." [9]

[Sidenote: February, B.C. 49.]
Pompey did desert Domitius, as has been seen. The surrender of Corfinium,
and the circumstances of it, gave Cicero the excuse which he evidently
desired to find for keeping clear of a vessel that appeared to him to be
going straight to shipwreck. He pleased himself with inventing evil
purposes for Pompey, to justify his leaving him. He thought it possible
that Domitius and his friends might have been purposely left to fall into
Caesar's hands, in the hope that Caesar would kill them and make himself
unpopular. Pompey, he was satisfied, meant as much to be a despot as
Caesar. Pompey might have defended Rome, if he had pleased; but his
purpose was to go away and raise a great fleet and a great Asiatic army,
and come back and ruin Italy, and be a new "Sylla." [10] In his distress
Cicero wrote both to Caesar and to Pompey, who was now at Brindisi. To
Caesar he said that, if he wished for peace, he might command his
services. He had always considered that Caesar had been wronged in the
course which had been pursued toward him. Envy and ill-nature had tried to
rob him of the honors which had been conferred on him by the Roman people.
He protested that he had himself supported Caesar's claims, and had
advised others to do the same. But he felt for Pompey also, he said, and
would gladly be of service to him.[11]

To Pompey he wrote:

[Sidenote: March, B.C. 49.]
"My advice was always for peace, even on hard terms. I wished you to
remain in Rome. You never hinted that you thought of leaving Italy. I
accepted your opinion, not for the constitution's sake, for I despaired of
saving it. The constitution is gone, and cannot be restored without a
destructive war; but I wished to be with you, and if I can join you now, I
will. I know well that my conduct has not pleased those who desired to
fight. I urged peace; not because I did not fear what they feared, but
because I thought peace a less evil than war. When the war had begun and
overtures were made to you, you responded so amply and so honorably that I
hoped I had prevailed.... I was never more friendly with Caesar than they
were; nor were they more true to the State than I. The difference between
us is this, that while they and I are alike good citizens, I preferred an
arrangement, and you, I thought, agreed with me. They chose to fight, and
as their counsels have been taken, I can but do my duty as a member of the
Commonwealth, and as a friend to you." [12]

       *       *       *       *       *

In this last sentence Cicero gives his clear opinion that the aristocracy
had determined upon war, and that for this reason and no other the
attempted negotiations had failed. Caesar, hoping that a better feeling
might arise after his dismissal of Domitius, had waited a few days at
Corfinium. Finding that Pompey had gone to Brindisi, he then followed,
trusting to overtake him before he could leave Italy, and again by
messengers pressed him earnestly for an interview. By desertions, and by
the accession of volunteers, Caesar had now six legions with him. If
Pompey escaped, he knew that the war would be long and dangerous. If he
could capture him, or persuade him to an agreement, peace could easily be
preserved. When he arrived outside the town, the consuls with half the
army had already gone. Pompey was still in Brindisi, with 12,000 men,
waiting till the transports could return to carry him after them. Pompey
again refused to see Caesar, and, in the absence of the consuls, declined
further discussion. Caesar tried to blockade him, but for want of ships
was unable to close the harbor. The transports came back, and Pompey
sailed for Durazzo.[13]

A few extracts and abridgments of letters will complete the picture of
this most interesting time.

_Cicero to Atticus_.[14]

"Observe the man into whose hands we have fallen. How keen he is, how
alert, how well prepared! By Jove, if he does not kill any one, and spares
the property of those who are so terrified, he will be in high favor. I
talk with the tradesmen and farmers. They care for nothing but their
lands, and houses, and money. They have gone right round. They fear the
man they trusted, and love the man they feared; and all this through our
own blunders. I am sick to think of it."

_Balbus to Cicero_.[15]

"Pompey and Caesar have been divided by perfidious villains. I beseech
you, Cicero, use your influence to bring them together again. Believe me,
Caesar will not only do all you wish, but will hold you to have done him
essential service. Would that I could say as much of Pompey, who I rather
wish than hope may be brought to terms! You have pleased Caesar by begging
Lentulus to stay in Italy, and you have more than pleased me. If he will
listen to you, will trust to what I tell him of Caesar, and will go back
to Rome, between you and him and the Senate, Caesar and Pompey may be
reconciled. If I can see this, I shall have lived long enough. I know you
will approve of Caesar's conduct at Corfinium."

_Cicero to Atticus_.[16]

"My preparations are complete. I wait till I can go by the upper sea; I
cannot go by the lower at this season. I must start soon, lest I be
detained. I do not go for Pompey's sake. I have long known him to be the
worst of politicians, and I know him now for the worst of generals. I go
because I am sneered at by the optimates. Precious optimates! What are
they about now? Selling themselves to Caesar? The towns receive Caesar as
a god. When this Pisistratus does them no harm, they are as grateful to
him as if he had protected them from others. What receptions will they not
give him? What honors will they not heap upon him? They are afraid, are
they? By Hercules, it is Pompey that they are afraid of. Caesar's
treacherous clemency enchants them. Who are these optimates, that insist
that I must leave Italy, while they remain? Let them be who they may, I am
ashamed to stay, though I know what to expect. I shall join a man who
means not to conquer Italy, but to lay it waste."

_Cicero to Atticus_.[17]

"Ought a man to remain in his country after it has fallen under a tyranny?
Ought a man to use any means to overthrow a tyranny, though he may ruin
his country in doing it? Ought he not rather to try to mend matters by
argument as opportunity offers? Is it right to make war on one's country
for the sake of liberty? Should a man adhere at all risks to one party,
though he considers them on the whole to have been a set of fools? Is a
person who has been his country's greatest benefactor, and has been
rewarded by envy and ill usage, to volunteer into danger for such a party?
May he not retire, and live quietly with his family, and leave public
affairs to their fate?

"I amused myself as times passes with these speculations."

_Cicero to Atticus_.[18]

"Pompey has sailed. I am pleased to find that you approve of my remaining.
My efforts now are to persuade Caesar to allow me to be absent from the
Senate, which is soon to meet. I fear he will refuse. I have been deceived
in two points. I expected an arrangement; and now I perceive that Pompey
has resolved upon a cruel and deadly war. By Heaven, he would have shown
himself a better citizen, and a better man, had he borne anything sooner
than have taken in hand such a purpose."

_Cicero to Atticus_.[19]

"Pompey is aiming at a monarchy after the type of Sylla. I know what I
say. Never did he show his hand more plainly. Has he not a good cause? The
very best. But mark me, it will be carried out most foully. He means to
strangle Rome and Italy with famine, and then waste and burn the country,
and seize the property of all who have any. Caesar may do as ill; but the
prospect is frightful. The fleets from Alexandria, Colchis, Sidon, Cyprus,
Pamphylia, Lycia, Rhodes, Chios, Byzantium, will be employed to cut off
our supplies, and then Pompey himself will come in his wrath."

_Cicero to Atticus_.[20]

"I think I have been mad from the beginning of this business. Why did not
I follow Pompey when things were at their worst? I found him (at Capua)
full of fears. I knew then what he would do, and I did not like it. He
made blunder on blunder. He never wrote to me, and only thought of flight.
It was disgraceful. But now my love for him revives. Books and philosophy
please me no more. Like the sad bird, I gaze night and day over the sea,
and long to fly away.[21] Were flight the worst, it would be nothing,
but I dread this terrible war, the like of which has never been seen. The
word will be, 'Sylla could do thus and thus; and why should not I?' Sylla,
Marius, Cinna, had each a constitutional cause, yet how cruel was their
victory! I shrank from war because I saw that something still more cruel
was now intended. I, whom some have called the saviour and parent of my
country! I to bring Getes, and Armenians, and Colchians upon Italy! I to
famish my fellow-citizens and waste their lands! Caesar, I reflected, was
in the first place but mortal; and then there were many ways in which he
might be got rid of.[22] But, as you say, the sun has fallen out of the
sky. The sick man thinks that while there is life there is hope. I
continued to hope as long as Pompey was in Italy. Now your letters are my
only consolation."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Caesar was but mortal!" The rapture with which Cicero hailed Caesar's
eventual murder explains too clearly the direction in which his thoughts
were already running. If the life of Caesar alone stood between his
country and the resurrection of the constitution, Cicero might well think,
as others have done, that it was better that one man should die rather
than the whole nation perish. We read the words with sorrow, and yet with
pity. That Cicero, after his past flatteries of Caesar, after the praises
which he was yet to heap on him, should yet have looked on his
assassination as a thing to be desired, throws a saddening light upon his
inner nature. But the age was sick with a moral plague, and neither strong
nor weak, wise nor unwise, bore any antidote against infection.


[1] The vision on the Rubicon, with the celebrated saying that "the die is
    cast," is unauthenticated, and not at all consistent with Caesar's
    character.

[2] _Ibid_., vii. 12.

[3] "Delectus ... invitorum est et pugnando ab horrentium."--_To
    Atticus_, vii. 13.

[4] Compare Caesar's account of these conditions, _De Bello Civili_,
    i. 10, with _Cicero to Atticus_, vii. 17.

[5] Between the Apennines and the Adriatic, about Ancona; in the line of
    Caesar's march should he advance from Kimini.

[6] _To Atticus_, vii. 16.

[7] _Ibid_., vii. 21.

[8] "Balbus quidem major ad me scribit, nihil malle Caesarem, quam
    principe Pompeio sine metu vivere. Tu puto haec credis."--_To
    Atticus_, viii. 9.

[9] _To Atticus_, viii. 3.

[10] _To Atticus_, viii. 11.

[11] "Judicavique te bello violari, contra cujus honorem, populi Romani
    beneficio concessum, inimici atque invidi niterentur. Sed ut eo
    tempore non modo ipse fautor dignitatis tuae fui, verum etiam
    caeteris auctor ad te adjuvandum, sic me nunc Pompeii dignitas
    vehementer movet," etc.--_Cicero to Caesar, enclosed in a letter to
    Atticus_, ix. 11.

[12] Enclosed to Atticus, viii. 11.

[13] Pompey had for _two years_ meditated on the course which he was
    now taking. Atticus had spoken of the intended flight from Italy as
    base. Cicero answers: "Hoc turpe Cnaeus noster biennio ante cogitavit:
    ita Sullaturit animus ejus, et diu proscripturit;" "so he apes Sylla
    and longs for a proscription."--_To Atticus_, ix. 10.

[14] _To Atticus_, viii. 13.

[15] Enclosed to Atticus, viii. 15.

[16] _To Atticus_, viii. 16.

[17] _To Atticus_, ix. 4.

[18] _Ibid_., ix. 6.

[19] _To Atticus_, ix. 7 and 9.

[20] _Ibid_.

[21] "Ita dies et noctes tanquam avis illa mare prospecto, evolare cupio."

[22] "Hunc primum mortalem esse, deinde etiam multis modis extingui posse
    cogitabam."--_To Atticus_, ix. 10.




CHAPTER XXII.


[Sidenote: April B.C. 49.]
Pompey was gone, gone to cover the Mediterranean with fleets which were to
starve Italy, and to raise an army which was to bring him back to play
Sylla's game once more. The consuls had gone with him, more than half
the Senate, and the young patricians, the descendants of the Metelli and
the Scipios, with the noble nature melted out of them, and only the pride
remaining. Caesar would have chased them at once, and have allowed them no
time to organize, but ships were wanting, and he could not wait to form a
fleet. Pompey's lieutenants, Afranius and Petreius and Varro, were in
Spain, with six legions and the levies of the Province. These had to be
promptly dealt with, and Sicily and Sardinia, on which Rome depended for
its corn, had to be cleared of enemies, and placed in trustworthy hands.
He sent Curio to Sicily and Valerius to Sardinia. Both islands surrendered
without resistance, Cato, who was in command in Messina, complaining
openly that he had been betrayed. Caesar went himself to Rome, which he
had not seen for ten years. He met Cicero by appointment on the road, and
pressed him to attend the Senate. Cicero's example, he said, would govern
the rest. If his account of the interview be true, Cicero showed more
courage than might have been expected from his letters to Atticus. He
inquired whether, if he went, he might speak as he pleased; he could not
consent to blame Pompey, and he should say that he disapproved of attacks
upon him, either in Greece or Spain. Caesar said that he could not permit
language of this kind. Cicero answered that he thought as much, and
therefore preferred to stay away.[1]Caesar let him take his own course,
and went on by himself. The consuls being absent, the Senate was convened
by the tribunes, Mark Antony and Cassius Longinus, both officers in
Caesar's army. The house was thin, but those present were cold and
hostile. They knew by this time that they need fear no violence. They
interpreted Caesar's gentleness into timidity, but they were satisfied
that, let them do what they pleased, he would not injure them. He
addressed the Senate with his usual clearness and simplicity. He had
asked, he said, for no extraordinary honors. He had waited the legal
period of ten years for a second consulship. A promise had been given that
his name should be submitted, and that promise had been withdrawn. He
dwelt on his forbearance, on the concessions which he had offered, and
again on his unjust recall, and the violent suppression of the legal
authority of the tribunes. He had proposed terms of peace, he said; he had
asked for interviews, but all in vain. If the Senate feared to commit
themselves by assisting him, he declared his willingness to carry on the
government in his own name; but he invited them to send deputies to
Pompey, to treat for an arrangement.

The Senate approved of sending a deputation; but Pompey had sworn, on
leaving, that he would hold all who had not joined him as his enemies; no
one, therefore, could be found willing to go. Three days were spent in
unmeaning discussion, and Caesar's situation did not allow of trifling.
With such people nothing could be done, and peace could be won only by the
sword. By an edict of his own he restored the children of the victims of
Sylla's proscription to their civil rights and their estates, the usurpers
being mostly in Pompey's camp. The assembly of the people voted him the
money in the treasury. Metellus, a tribune in Pompey's interest, forbade
the opening of the doors, but he was pushed out of the way. Cesar took
such money as he needed, and went with his best speed to join his troops
in Gaul.

His singular gentleness had encouraged the opposition to him in Rome. In
Gaul he encountered another result of his forbearance more practically
trying. The Gauls themselves, though so lately conquered in so desperate a
struggle, remained quiet. Then, if ever, they had an opportunity of
reasserting their independence. They not only did not take advantage of
it, but, as if they disdained the unworthy treatment of their great enemy,
each tribe sent him, at his request, a body of horse, led by the bravest
of their chiefs. His difficulty came from a more tainted source.
Marseilles, the most important port in the western Mediterranean, the gate
through which the trade of the Province passed in and out, had revolted to
Pompey. Domitius Ahenobarbus, who had been dismissed at Corfinium, had
been despatched to encourage and assist the townspeople with a squadron of
Pompey's fleet. When Caesar arrived, Marseilles closed its gates, and
refused to receive him. He could not afford to leave behind him an open
door into the Province, and he could ill spare troops for a siege.
Afranius and Petreius were already over the Ebro with 30,000 legionaries
and with nearly twice as many Spanish auxiliaries. Yet Marseilles must be
shut in, and quickly. Fabius was sent forward to hold the passes of the
Pyrenees. Caesar's soldiers were set to work in the forest. Trees were cut
down and sawn into planks. In thirty days twelve stout vessels, able to
hold their own against Domitius, were built and launched and manned. The
fleet thus extemporized was trusted to Decimus Brutus. Three legions were
left to make approaches, and, if possible, to take the town on the land
side; and, leaving Marseilles blockaded by sea and land, Caesar hurried on
to the Spanish frontier. The problem before him was worthy of his genius.
A protracted war in the peninsula would be fatal. Pompey would return to
Italy, and there would be no one to oppose him there. The Spanish army had
to be destroyed or captured, and that immediately; and it was stronger
than Caesar's own, and was backed by all the resources of the province.

The details of a Roman campaign are no longer interesting. The results,
with an outline of the means by which they were brought about, alone
concern the modern reader. Pompey's lieutenant, having failed to secure
the passes, was lying at Lerida, in Catalonia, at the junction of the
Segre and the Naguera, with the Ebro behind them, and with a mountain
range, the Sierra de Llena, on their right flank. Their position was
impregnable to direct attack. From their rear they drew inexhaustible
supplies. The country in front had been laid waste to the Pyrenees, and
everything which Caesar required had to be brought to him from Gaul. In
forty days from the time at which the armies came in sight of each other
Afranius and Petreius, with all their legions, were prisoners. Varro, in
the south, was begging for peace, and all Spain lay at Caesar's feet. At
one moment he was almost lost. The melting of the snows in the mountains
brought a flood down the Segre. The bridges were carried away, the fords
were impassable, and his convoys were at the mercy of the enemy. News flew
to Rome that all was over, that Caesar's army was starving, that he was
cut off between the rivers, and in a few days must surrender. Marseilles
still held out. Pompey's, it seemed, was to be the winning side, and
Cicero and many others, who had hung back to watch how events would turn,
made haste to join their friends in Greece before their going had lost
show of credit.[2]

The situation was indeed most critical. Even Caesar's own soldiers became
unsteady. He remarks that in civil wars generally men show less composure
than in ordinary campaigns. But resource in difficulties is the
distinction of great generals. He had observed in Britain that the coast
fishermen used boats made out of frames of wicker covered with skins. The
river banks were fringed with willows. There were hides in abundance on
the carcasses of the animals in the camp. Swiftly in these vessels the
swollen waters of the Segre were crossed; the convoys were rescued. The
broken bridges were repaired. The communications of the Pompeians were
threatened in turn, and they tried to fall back over the Ebro; but they
left their position only to be intercepted, and after a few feeble
struggles laid down their arms. Among the prisoners were found several of
the young nobles who had been released at Corfinium. It appeared that they
regarded Caesar as an outlaw with whom obligations were not binding. The
Pompeian generals had ordered any of Caesar's soldiers who fell into their
hands to be murdered. He was not provoked into retaliation. He again
dismissed the whole of the captive force, officers and men, contenting
himself with this time exacting a promise from them that they would not
serve against him again. They gave their word and broke it. The generals
and military tribunes made their way to Greece to Pompey. Of the rest,
some enlisted in Caesar's legions; others scattered to combine again when
opportunity allowed.

Varro, who commanded a legion in the south, behaved more honorably. He
sent in his submission, entered into the same engagement, and kept it. He
was an old friend of Caesar's, and better understood him. Caesar, after
the victory at Lerida, went down to Cordova, and summoned the leading
Spaniards and Romans to meet him there. All came and promised obedience.
Varro gave in his accounts, with his ships, and stores, and money. Caesar
then embarked at Cadiz, and went round to Tarragona, where his own legions
were waiting for him. From Tarragona he marched back by the Pyrenees, and
came in time to receive in person the surrender of Marseilles.

The siege had been a difficult one, with severe engagements both by land
and sea. Domitius and his galleys had attacked the ungainly but useful
vessels which Caesar had extemporized. He had been driven back with the
loss of half his fleet. Pompey had sent a second squadron to help him, and
this had fared no better. It had fled after a single battle and never
reappeared. The land works had been assailed with ingenuity and courage.
The agger had been burnt and the siege towers destroyed. But they had been
repaired instantly by the industry of the legions, and Marseilles was at
the last extremity when Caesar arrived. He had wished to spare the
townspeople, and had sent orders that the place was not to be stormed. On
his appearance the keys of the gates were brought to him without
conditions. Again he pardoned every one; more, he said, for the reputation
of the colony than for the merits of its inhabitants. Domitius had fled in
a gale of wind, and once more escaped. A third time he was not to be so
fortunate.

[Sidenote: B.C. 48]
Two legions were left in charge of Marseilles; others returned to their
quarters in Gaul. Well as the tribes had behaved, it was unsafe to presume
too much on their fidelity, and Caesar was not a partisan chief, but the
guardian of the Roman Empire. With the rest of his army he returned to
Rome at the beginning of the winter. All had been quiet since the news of
the capitulation at Lerida. The aristocracy had gone to Pompey. The
disaffection among the people of which Cicero spoke had existed only in
his wishes, or had not extended beyond the classes who had expected from
Caesar a general partition of property, and had been disappointed. His own
successes had been brilliant. Spain, Gaul, and Italy, Sicily and Sardinia,
were entirely his own. Elsewhere and away from his own eye things had gone
less well for him. An attempt to make a naval force in the Adriatic had
failed; and young Curio, who had done Caesar such good service as tribune,
had met with a still graver disaster. After recovering Sicily, Curio had
been directed to cross to Africa and expel Pompey's garrisons from the
Province. His troops were inferior, consisting chiefly of the garrison
which had surrendered at Corfinium. Through military inexperience he had
fallen into a trap laid for him by Juba, King of Mauritania, and had been
killed.

Caesar regretted Curio personally. The African misfortune was not
considerable in itself, but it encouraged hopes and involved consequences
which he probably foresaw. There was no present leisure, however, to
attend to Juba. On arriving at the city he was named Dictator. As Dictator
he held the consular elections, and, with Servilius Isauricus for a
colleague, he was chosen consul for the year which had been promised to
him, though under circumstances so strangely changed. With curious
punctiliousness he observed that the legal interval had expired since he
was last in office, and that therefore there was no formal objection to
his appointment.

Civil affairs were in the wildest confusion. The Senate had fled; the
administration had been left to Antony, whose knowledge of business was
not of a high order; and over the whole of Italy hung the terror of
Pompey's fleet and of an Asiatic invasion. Public credit was shaken. Debts
had not been paid since the civil war began. Moneylenders had charged
usurious interest for default, and debtors were crying for _novae
tabulae_, and hoped to clear themselves by bankruptcy. Caesar had but
small leisure for such matters. Pompey had been allowed too long a
respite, and unless he sought Pompey in Greece, Pompey would be seeking
him at home, and the horrid scenes of Sylla's wars would be enacted over
again. He did what he could, risking the loss of the favor of the mob by
disappointing dishonest expectations. Estimates were drawn of all debts as
they stood twelve months before. The principal was declared to be still
due. The interest for the interval was cancelled. Many persons complained
of injustice which they had met with in the courts of law during the time
that Pompey was in power. Caesar refused to revise the sentences himself,
lest he should seem to be encroaching on functions not belonging to him;
but he directed that such causes should be heard again.

Eleven days were all he could afford to Rome. So swift was Caesar that his
greatest exploits were measured by days. He had to settle accounts with
Pompey while it was still winter, and while Pompey's preparations for the
invasion of Italy were still incomplete; and he and his veterans, scarcely
allowing themselves a breathing-time, went down to Brindisi.

It was now the beginning of January by the unreformed calendar (by the
seasons the middle of October)--a year within a few days since Caesar had
crossed the Rubicon. He had nominally twelve legions under him. But long
marches had thinned the ranks of his old and best-tried troops. The change
from the dry climate of Gaul and Spain to the south of Italy in a wet
autumn had affected the health of the rest, and there were many invalids.
The force available for field service was small for the work which was
before it: in all not more than 30,000 men. Pompey's army lay immediately
opposite Brindisi, at Durazzo. It was described afterward as inharmonious
and ill-disciplined, but so far as report went at the time Caesar had
never encountered so formidable an enemy. There were nine legions of Roman
citizens with their complements full. Two more were coming up with Scipio
from Syria. Besides these there were auxiliaries from the allied princes
in the East; corps from Greece and Asia Minor, slingers and archers from
Crete and the islands. Of money, of stores of all kinds, there was
abundance, for the Eastern revenue had been all paid for the last year to
Pompey, and he had levied impositions at his pleasure.

Such was the Senate's land army, and before Caesar could cross swords with
it a worse danger lay in his path. It was not for nothing that Cicero said
that Pompey had been careful of his fleet. A hundred and thirty ships, the
best which were to be had, were disposed in squadrons along the east shore
of the Adriatic; the head-quarters were at Corfu; and the one purpose was
to watch the passage and prevent Caesar from crossing over.

[Sidenote: January, B.C. 48.]
Transports run down by vessels of war were inevitably sunk. Twelve
fighting triremes, the remains of his attempted Adriatic fleet, were all
that Caesar could collect for a convoy. The weather was wild. Even of
transports he had but enough to carry half his army in a single trip. With
such a prospect and with the knowledge that if he reached Greece at all he
would have to land in the immediate neighborhood of Pompey's enormous
host, surprise has been expressed that Caesar did not prefer to go round
through Illyria, keeping his legions together. But Caesar had won many
victories by appearing where he was least expected. He liked well to
descend like a bolt out of the blue sky; and, for the very reason that no
ordinary person would under such circumstances have thought of attempting
the passage, he determined to try it. Long marches exhausted the troops.
In bad weather the enemy's fleet preferred the harbors to the open sea;
and perhaps he had a further and special ground of confidence in knowing
that the officer in charge at Corfu was his old acquaintance, Bibulus--
Bibulus, the fool of the aristocracy, the butt of Cicero, who had failed
in everything which he had undertaken, and had been thanked by Cato for
his ill successes. Caesar knew the men with whom he had to deal. He knew
Pompey's incapacity; he knew Bibulus's incapacity. He knew that public
feeling among the people was as much on his side in Greece as in Italy.
Above all, he knew his own troops, and felt that he could rely on them,
however heavy the odds might be. He was resolved to save Italy at all
hazards from becoming the theatre of war, and therefore the best road for
him was that which would lead most swiftly to his end.

On the 4th January, then, by unreformed time, Caesar sailed with 15,000
men and 500 horses from Brindisi. The passage was rough but swift, and he
landed without adventure at Acroceraunia, now Cape Linguetta, on the
eastern shore of the Straits of Otranto. Bibulus saw him pass from the
heights of Corfu, and put to sea, too late to intercept him--in time,
however, unfortunately, to fall in with the returning transports. Caesar
had started them immediately after disembarking, and had they made use of
the darkness they might have gone over unperceived; they lingered and were
overtaken; Bibulus captured thirty of them, and, in rage at his own
blunder, killed every one that he found on board.

Ignorant of this misfortune, and expecting that Antony would follow him in
a day or two with the remainder of the army, Caesar advanced at once
toward Durazzo, occupied Apollonia, and entrenched himself on the left
bank of the river Apsus. The country, as he anticipated, was well-disposed
and furnished him amply with supplies. He still hoped to persuade Pompey
to come to terms with him. He trusted, perhaps not unreasonably, that the
generosity with which he had treated Marseilles and the Spanish legions
might have produced an effect; and he appealed once more to Pompey's wiser
judgment. Vibullius Rufus, who had been taken at Corfinium, and a second
time on the Lerida, had since remained with Caesar. Rufus, being
personally known as an ardent member of the Pompeian party, was sent
forward to Durazzo with a message of peace.

"Enough had been done," Caesar said, "and Fortune ought not to be tempted
further. Pompey had lost Italy, the two Spains, Sicily, and Sardinia, and
a hundred and thirty cohorts of his soldiers had been captured. Caesar had
lost Curio and the army of Africa. They were thus on an equality, and
might spare their country the consequences of further rivalry. If either
he or Pompey gained a decisive advantage, the victor would be compelled to
insist on harder terms. If they could not agree, Caesar was willing to
leave the question between them to the Senate and people of Rome, and for
themselves, he proposed that they should each take an oath to disband
their troops in three days."

Pompey, not expecting Caesar, was absent in Macedonia when he heard of his
arrival, and was hurrying back to Durazzo. Caesar's landing had produced a
panic in his camp. Men and officers were looking anxiously in each other's
faces. So great was the alarm, so general the distrust, that Labienus had
sworn in the presence of the army that he would stand faithfully by
Pompey. Generals, tribunes, and centurions had sworn after him. They had
then moved up to the Apsus and encamped on the opposite side of the river,
waiting for Pompey to come up.

There was now a pause on both sides. Antony was unable to leave Brindisi,
Bibulus being on the watch day and night. A single vessel attempted the
passage. It was taken, and every one on board was massacred. The weather
was still wild, and both sides suffered. If Caesar's transports could not
put to sea, Bibulus's crews could not land either for fuel or water
anywhere south of Apollonia. Bibulus held on obstinately till he died of
exposure to wet and cold, so ending his useless life; but his death did
not affect the situation favorably for Caesar; his command fell into abler
hands.

[Sidenote: February, B.C. 48.]
At length Pompey arrived. Vibullius Rufus delivered his message. Pompey
would not hear him to the end. "What care I," he said, "for life or
country if I am to hold both by the favor of Caesar? All men will think
thus of me if I make peace now.... I left Italy. Men will say that Caesar
has brought me back."

In the legions the opinion was different. The two armies were divided only
by a narrow river. Friends met and talked. They asked each other for what
purpose so desperate a war had been undertaken. The regular troops all
idolized Caesar. Deputations from both sides were chosen to converse and
consult, with Caesar's warmest approval. Some arrangement might have
followed. But Labienus interposed. He appeared at the meeting as if to
join in the conference; he was talking in apparent friendliness to
Cicero's acquaintance, Publius Vatinius, who was serving with Caesar.
Suddenly a shower of darts were hurled at Vatinius. His men flung
themselves in front of him and covered his body; but most of them were
wounded, and the assembly broke up in confusion, Labienus shouting, "Leave
your talk of composition; there can be no peace till you bring us Caesar's
head."

[Sidenote: April, B.C. 48.]
Cool thinkers were beginning to believe that Caesar was in a scrape from
which his good fortune would this time fail to save him. Italy was on the
whole steady, but the slippery politicians in the capital were on the
watch. They had been disappointed on finding that Caesar would give no
sanction to confiscation of property, and a spark of fire burst out which
showed that the elements of mischief were active as ever. Cicero's
correspondent, Marcus Caelius, had thrown himself eagerly on Caesar's side
at the beginning of the war. He had been left as praetor at Rome when
Caesar went to Greece. He in his wisdom conceived that the wind was
changing, and that it was time for him to earn his pardon from Pompey. He
told the mob that Caesar would do nothing for them, that Caesar cared only
for his capitalists. He wrote privately to Cicero that he was bringing
them over to Pompey,[3] and he was doing it in the way in which
pretended revolutionists so often play into the hands of reactionaries. He
proposed a law in the Assembly in the spirit of Jack Cade, that no debts
should be paid in Rome for six years, and that every tenant should occupy
his house for two years free of rent. The administrators of the government
treated him as a madman, and deposed him from office. He left the city
pretending that he was going to Caesar. The once notorious Milo, who had
been in exile since his trial for the murder of Clodius, privately joined
him; and together they raised a band of gladiators in Campania, professing
to have a commission from Pompey. Milo was killed. Caelius fled to Thurii,
where he tried to seduce Caesar's garrison, and was put to death for his
treachery. The familiar actors in the drama were beginning to drop.
Bibulus was gone, and now Caelius and Milo. Fools and knaves are usually
the first to fall in civil distractions, as they and their works are the
active causes of them.

Meantime months passed away. The winter wore through in forced inaction,
and Caesar watched in vain for the sails of his coming transports. The
Pompeians had for some weeks blockaded Brindisi. Antony drove them off
with armed boats; but still he did not start, and Caesar thought that
opportunities had been missed.[4] He wrote to Antony sharply. The
legions, true as steel, were ready for any risks sooner than leave their
commander in danger. A south wind came at last, and they sailed. They were
seen in mid-channel, and closely pursued. Night fell, and in the darkness
they were swept past Durazzo, to which Pompey had again withdrawn, with
the Pompeian squadron in full chase behind them. They ran into the harbor
of Nymphaea, three miles north of Lissa, and were fortunate in entering it
safely. Sixteen of the pursuers ran upon the rocks, and the crews owed
their lives to Caesar's troops, who saved them. So Caesar mentions
briefly, in silent contrast to the unvarying ferocity of the Pompeian
leaders. Two only of the transports which had left Brindisi were missing
in the morning. They had gone by mistake into Lissa, and were surrounded
by the boats of the enemy, who promised that no one should be injured if
they surrendered. "Here," says Caesar, in a characteristic sentence, "may
be observed the value of firmness of mind." One of the vessels had two
hundred and twenty young soldiers on board, the other two hundred
veterans. The recruits were sea-sick and frightened. They trusted the
enemy's fair words, and were immediately murdered. The others forced their
pilot to run the ship ashore. They cut their way through a band of
Pompey's cavalry, and joined their comrades without the loss of a man.

Antony's position was most dangerous, for Pompey's whole army lay between
him and Caesar; but Caesar marched rapidly round Durazzo, and had joined
his friend before Pompey knew that he had moved.

[Sidenote: May, B.C. 48.]
Though still far outnumbered, Caesar was now in a condition to meet Pompey
in the field, and desired nothing so much as a decisive action. Pompey
would not give him the opportunity, and kept within his lines. To show the
world, therefore, how matters stood between them, Caesar drew a line of
strongly fortified posts round Pompey's camp and shut him in. Force him to
surrender he could not, for the sea was open, and Pompey's fleet had
entire command of it. But the moral effect on Italy of the news that
Pompey was besieged might, it was hoped, force him out from his
entrenchments. If Pompey could not venture to engage Caesar on his own
chosen ground, and surrounded by his Eastern friends, his cause at home
would be abandoned as lost. Nor was the active injury which Caesar was
able to inflict inconsiderable. He turned the streams on which Pompey's
camp depended for water. The horses and cattle died. Fever set in with
other inconveniences. The labor of the siege was, of course, severe. The
lines were many miles in length, and the difficulty of sending assistance
to a point threatened by a sally was extremely great. The corn in the
fields was still green, and supplies grew scanty. Meat Caesar's army had,
but of wheat little or none; they were used to hardship, however, and bore
it with admirable humor. They made cakes out of roots, ground into paste
and mixed with milk; and thus, in spite of privation and severe work, they
remained in good health, and deserters daily came into them.

So the siege of Durazzo wore on, diversified with occasional encounters,
which Caesar details with the minuteness of a scientific general writing
for his profession, and with those admiring mentions of each individual
act of courage which so intensely endeared him to his troops. Once an
accidental opportunity offered itself for a successful storm, but Caesar
was not on the spot. The officer in command shrank from responsibility;
and, notwithstanding the seriousness of the consequences, Caesar said that
the officer was right.

[Sidenote: June, B.C. 48.]
Pompey's army was not yet complete. Metellus Scipio had not arrived with
the Syrian legions. Scipio had come leisurely through Asia Minor,
plundering cities and temples and flaying the people with requisitions. He
had now reached Macedonia, and Domitius Calvinus had been sent with a
separate command to watch him. Caesar's own force, already too small for
the business on hand, was thus further reduced, and at this moment there
fell out one of those accidents which overtake at times the ablest
commanders, and gave occasion for Caesar's observation, that Pompey knew
not how to conquer.

There were two young Gauls with Caesar whom he had promoted to important
positions. They were reported to have committed various peculations.
Caesar spoke to them privately. They took offence and deserted. There was
a weak spot in Caesar's lines at a point the furthest removed from the
body of the army. The Gauls gave Pompey notice of it, and on this point
Pompey flung himself with his whole strength. The attack was a surprise.
The engagement which followed was desperate and unequal, for the reliefs
were distant and came up one by one. For once Caesar's soldiers were
seized with panic, lost their order, and forgot their discipline. On the
news of danger he flew himself to the scene, threw himself into the
thickest of the fight, and snatched the standards from the flying bearers.
But on this single occasion he failed in restoring confidence. The defeat
was complete; and, had Pompey understood his business, Caesar's whole army
might have been overthrown. Nearly a thousand men were killed, with many
field officers and many centurions. Thirty-two standards were lost, and
some hundreds of legionaries were taken. Labienus begged the prisoners of
Pompey. He called them mockingly old comrades. He asked them how veterans
came to fly. They were led into the midst of the camp and were all killed.

Caesar's legions had believed themselves invincible. The effect of this
misfortune was to mortify and infuriate them. They were eager to fling
themselves again upon the enemy and win back their laurels; but Caesar saw
that they were excited and unsteady, and that they required time to
collect themselves. He spoke to them with his usual calm cheerfulness. He
praised their courage. He reminded them of their many victories, and bade
them not be cast down at a misadventure which they would soon repair; but
he foresaw that the disaster would affect the temper of Greece and make
his commissariat more difficult than it was already. He perceived that he
must adopt some new plan of campaign, and with instant decision he fell
back upon Apollonia.

[Sidenote: July, B.C 48.]
The gleam of victory was the cause of Pompey's ruin. It was unlooked for,
and the importance of it exaggerated. Caesar was supposed to be flying
with the wreck of an army completely disorganized and disheartened. So
sure were the Pompeians that it could never rally again that they regarded
the war as over; they made no efforts to follow up a success which, if
improved, might have been really decisive; and they gave Caesar the one
thing which he needed, time to recover from its effects. After he had
placed his sick and wounded in security at Apollonia, his first object was
to rejoin Calvinus, who had been sent to watch Scipio, and might now be
cut off. Fortune was here favorable. Calvinus, by mere accident, learnt
his danger, divined where Caesar would be, and came to meet him. The next
thing was to see what Pompey would do. He might embark for Italy. In this
case Caesar would have to follow him by Illyria and the head of the
Adriatic. Cisalpine Gaul was true to him, and could be relied on to refill
his ranks. Or Pompey might pursue him in the hope to make an end of the
war in Greece, and an opportunity might offer itself for an engagement
under fairer terms. On the whole he considered the second alternative the
more likely one, and with this expectation he led his troops into the rich
plains of Thessaly for the better feeding which they so much needed. The
news of his defeat preceded him. Gomphi, an important Thessalian town,
shut its gates upon him; and, that the example might not be followed,
Gomphi was instantly stormed and given up to plunder. One such lesson was
enough. No more opposition was ventured by the Greek cities.

[Sidenote: August 9, B.C. 48.]
Pompey meanwhile had broken up from Durazzo, and after being joined by
Scipio was following leisurely. There were not wanting persons who warned
him that Caesar's legions might still be dangerous. Both Cicero and Cato
had advised him to avoid a battle, to allow Caesar to wander about Greece
till his supplies failed and his army was worn out by marches. Pompey
himself was inclined to the same opinion. But Pompey was no longer able to
act on his own judgment. The senators who were with him in the camp
considered that in Greece, as in Rome, they were the supreme rulers of the
Roman Empire. All along they had held their sessions and their debates,
and they had voted resolutions which they expected to see complied with.
They had never liked Pompey. If Cicero was right in supposing that Pompey
meant to be another Sylla, the senators had no intention of allowing it.
They had gradually wrested his authority out of his hands, and reduced him
to the condition of an officer of the Senatorial Directory. These
gentlemen, more especially the two late consuls, Scipio and Lentulus, were
persuaded that a single blow would now make an end of Caesar. His army was
but half the size of theirs, without counting the Asiatic auxiliaries. The
men, they were persuaded, were dispirited by defeat and worn out. So sure
were they of victory that they were impatient of every day which delayed
their return to Italy. They accused Pompey of protracting the war
unnecessarily, that he might have the honor of commanding such
distinguished persons as themselves. They had arranged everything that was
to be done. Caesar and his band of cutthroats were in imagination already
despatched. They had butchered hitherto every one of them who had fallen
into their hands, and the same fate was designed for their political
allies. They proposed to establish a senatorial court after their return
to Italy, in which citizens of all kinds who had not actually fought on
the Senate's side were to be brought up for trial. Those who should be
proved to have been active for Caesar were to be at once killed, and their
estates confiscated. Neutrals were to fare almost as badly, Not to have
assisted the lawful rulers of the State was scarcely better than to have
rebelled against them. They, too, were liable to death or forfeiture, or
both. A third class of offenders was composed of those who had been within
Pompey's lines, but had borne no part in the fighting. These cold-hearted
friends were to be tried and punished according to the degree of their
criminality. Cicero was the person pointed at in the last division.
Cicero's clear judgment had shown him too clearly what was likely to be
the result of a campaign conducted as he found it on his arrival, and he
had spoken his thoughts with sarcastic freedom. The noble lords came next
to a quarrel among themselves as to how the spoils of Caesar were to be
divided. Domitius Ahenobarbus, Lentulus Spinther, and Scipio were unable
to determine which of them was to succeed Caesar as Pontifex Maximus, and
which was to have his palace and gardens in Rome. The Roman oligarchy were
true to their character to the eve of their ruin. It was they, with their
idle luxury, their hunger for lands and office and preferment, who had
brought all this misery upon their country; and standing, as it were, at
the very bar of judgment, with the sentence of destruction about to be
pronounced upon them, their thoughts were still bent upon how to secure
the largest share of plunder for themselves.

The battle of Pharsalia was not the most severe, still less was it the
last, action of the war. But it acquired a special place in history,
because it was a battle fought by the Roman aristocracy in their own
persons in defence of their own supremacy. Senators and the sons of
senators; the heirs of the names and fortunes of the ancient Roman
families; the leaders of society in Roman saloons, and the chiefs of the
political party of the optimates in the Curia and Forum, were here present
on the field; representatives in person and in principle of the traditions
of Sylla, brought face to face with the representative of Marius. Here
were the men who had pursued Caesar through so many years with a hate so
inveterate. Here were the haughty Patrician Guard, who had drawn their
swords on him in the senate-house, young lords whose theory of life was to
lounge through it in patrician _insouciance_. The other great actions
were fought by the ignoble multitude whose deaths were of less
significance. The plains of Pharsalia were watered by the precious blood
of the elect of the earth. The battle there marked an epoch like no other
in the history of the world.

For some days the two armies had watched each other's movements. Caesar,
to give his men confidence, had again offered Pompey an opportunity of
fighting. But Pompey had kept to positions where he could not be attacked.
To draw him into more open ground, Caesar had shifted his camp
continually. Pompey had followed cautiously, still remaining on his guard.
His political advisers were impatient of these dilatory movements. They
taunted him with cowardice. They insisted that he should set his foot on
this insignificant adversary promptly and at once; and Pompey, gathering
courage from their confidence, and trusting to his splendid cavalry,
agreed at last to use the first occasion that presented itself.

One morning, on the Enipeus, near Larissa, the 9th of August, old style,
or toward the end of May by real time, Caesar had broken up his camp and
was preparing for his usual leisurely march, when he perceived a movement
in Pompey's lines which told him that the moment which he had so long
expected was come. Labienus, the evil genius of the Senate, who had
tempted them into the war by telling them that his comrades were as
disaffected as himself, and had fired Caesar's soldiers into intensified
fierceness by his barbarities at Durazzo, had spoken the deciding word:
"Believe not," Labienus had said, "that this is the army which defeated
the Gauls and the Germans. I was in those battles, and what I say I know.
That army has disappeared. Part fell in action; part perished of fever in
the autumn in Italy. Many went home. Many were left behind unable to move.
The men you see before you are levies newly drawn from the colonies beyond
the Po. Of the veterans that were left, the best were killed at Durazzo."

A council of war had been held at dawn. There had been a solemn taking of
oaths again. Labienus swore that he would not return to the camp except as
a conqueror; so swore Pompey; so swore Lentulus, Scipio, Domitius; so
swore all the rest. They had reason for their high spirits. Pompey had
forty-seven thousand Roman infantry, not including his allies, and seven
thousand cavalry. Caesar had but twenty-two thousand, and of horse only a
thousand. Pompey's position was carefully chosen. His right wing was
covered by the Enipeus, the opposite bank of which was steep and wooded.
His left spread out into the open plain of Pharsalia. His plan of battle
was to send forward his cavalry outside over the open ground, with clouds
of archers and slingers, to scatter Caesar's horse, and then to wheel
round and envelop his legions. Thus he had thought they would lose heart
and scatter at the first shock. Caesar had foreseen what Pompey would
attempt to do. His own scanty cavalry, mostly Gauls and Germans, would, he
well knew, be unequal to the weight which would be thrown on them. He had
trained an equal number of picked active men to fight in their ranks, and
had thus doubled their strength. Fearing that this might be not enough, he
had taken another precaution. The usual Roman formation in battle was in
triple line. Caesar had formed a fourth line of cohorts specially selected
to engage the cavalry; and on them, he said, in giving them their
instructions, the result of the action would probably depend.

Pompey commanded on his own left with the two legions which he had taken
from Caesar; outside him on the plain were his flying companies of Greeks
and islanders, with the cavalry covering them. Caesar, with his favorite
10th, was opposite Pompey. His two faithful tribunes, Mark Antony and
Cassius Longinus, led the left and centre. Servilia's son, Marcus Brutus,
was in Pompey's army. Caesar had given special directions that Brutus, if
recognized, should not be injured. Before the action began he spoke a few
general words to such of his troops as could hear him. They all knew, he
said, how earnestly he had sought for peace, how careful he had always
been of his soldiers' lives, how unwilling to deprive the State of the
services of any of her citizens, to whichever party they might belong.
Crastinus, a centurion, of the 10th legion, already known to Caesar for
his gallantry, called out, "Follow me, my comrades, and strike, and strike
home, for your general. This one battle remains to be fought, and he will
have his rights and we our liberty. General," he said, looking to Caesar,
"I shall earn your thanks this day, dead or alive."

Pompey had ordered his first line to stand still to receive Caesar's
charge.[5] They would thus be fresh, while the enemy would reach them
exhausted--a mistake on Pompey's part, as Caesar thought; "for a fire and
alacrity," he observes, "is kindled in all men when they meet in battle,
and a wise general should rather encourage than repress their fervor."

The signal was given. Caesar's front rank advanced running. Seeing the
Pompeians did not move, they halted, recovered breath, then rushed on,
flung their darts, and closed sword in hand. At once Pompey's horse bore
down, outflanking Caesar's right wing, with the archers behind and between
them raining showers of arrows. Caesar's cavalry gave way before the
shock, and the outer squadrons came wheeling round to the rear, expecting
that there would be no one to encounter them. The fourth line, the pick
and flower of the legions, rose suddenly in their way. Surprised and
shaken by the fierceness of the attack on them, the Pompeians turned, they
broke, they galloped wildly off. The best cavalry in those Roman battles
were never a match for infantry when in close formation, and Pompey's
brilliant squadrons were carpet-knights from the saloon and the circus.
They never rallied, or tried to rally; they made off for the nearest
hills. The archers were cut to pieces; and the chosen corps, having
finished so easily the service for which they had been told off, threw
themselves on the now exposed flank of Pompey's left wing. It was
composed, as has been said, of the legions which had once been Caesar's,
which had fought under him at the Vingeanne and at Alesia. They ill liked,
perhaps, the change of masters, and were in no humor to stand the charge
of their old comrades coming on with the familiar rush of victory. Caesar
ordered up his third line, which had not yet been engaged; and at once on
all sides Pompey's great army gave way, and fled. Pompey himself, the
shadow of his old name, long harasssd out of self-respect by his
senatorial directors, a commander only in appearance, had left the field
in the beginning of the action. He had lost heart on the defeat of the
cavalry, and had retired to his tent to wait the issue of the day.

The stream of fugitives pouring in told him too surely what the issue had
been. He sprang upon his horse and rode off in despair. His legions were
rushing back in confusion. Caesar, swift always at the right moment, gave
the enemy no leisure to re-form, and fell at once upon the camp. It was
noon, and the morning had been sultry; but heat and weariness were
forgotten in the enthusiasm of a triumph which all then believed must
conclude the war. A few companies of Thracians, who had been left on
guard, made a brief resistance, but they were soon borne down. The beaten
army, which a few hours before were sharing in imagination the lands and
offices of their conquerors, fled out through the opposite gates, throwing
away their arms, flinging down their standards, and racing, officers and
men, for the rocky hills which at a mile's distance promised them shelter.

The camp itself was a singular picture. Houses of turf had been built for
the luxurious patricians, with ivy trained over the entrances to shade
their delicate faces from the summer sun; couches had been laid out for
them to repose on after their expected victory; tables were spread with
plate and wines, and the daintiest preparations of Roman cookery. Caesar
commented on the scene with mournful irony. "And these men," he said,
"accused my patient, suffering army, which had not even common
necessaries, of dissoluteness and profligacy!"

Two hundred only of Caesar's men had fallen. The officers had suffered
most. The gallant Crastinus, who had nobly fulfilled his promise, had been
killed, among many others, in opening a way for his comrades. The
Pompeians, after the first shock, had been cut down unresisting. Fifteen
thousand of them lay scattered dead about the ground. There were few
wounded in these battles. The short sword of the Romans seldom left its
work unfinished.

"They would have it so," Caesar is reported to have said, as he looked
sadly over the littered bodies in the familiar patrician dress.[6]
"After all that I had done for my country, I, Caius Caesar, should have
been condemned by them as a criminal if I had not appealed to my army."

[Sidenote: B.C. 48.]
But Caesar did not wait to indulge in reflections. His object was to stamp
the fire out on the spot, that it might never kindle again. More than half
the Pompeians had reached the hills and were making for Larissa. Leaving
part of his legions in the camp to rest, Caesar took the freshest the same
evening, and by a rapid march cut off their line of retreat. The hills
were waterless, the weather suffocating. A few of the guiltiest of the
Pompeian leaders, Labienus, Lentulus, Afranius, Petreius, and Metellus
Scipio (Cicero and Cato had been left at Durazzo), contrived to escape in
the night. The rest, twenty-four thousand of them, surrendered at
daylight. They came down praying for mercy, which they had never shown,
sobbing out their entreaties on their knees that the measure which they
had dealt to others might not be meted out to them. Then and always Caesar
hated unnecessary cruelty, and never, if he could help it, allowed
executions in cold blood. He bade them rise, said a few gentle words to
relieve their fears, and sent them back to the camp. Domitius Ahenobarbus,
believing that for him at least there could be no forgiveness, tried to
escape, and was killed. The rest were pardoned.

So ended the battle of Pharsalia. A hundred and eighty standards were
taken and all the eagles of Pompey's legions. In Pompey's own tent was
found his secret correspondence, implicating persons, perhaps, whom Caesar
had never suspected, revealing the mysteries of the past three years.
Curiosity and even prudence might have tempted him to look into it. His
only wish was that the past should be forgotten: he burnt the whole mass
of papers unread.

Would the war now end? That was the question. Caesar thought that it would
not end as long as Pompey was at large. The feelings of others may be
gathered out of abridgments from Cicero's letters:

_Cicero to Plancius_.[7]

"Victory on one side meant massacre, on the other slavery. It consoles me
to remember that I foresaw these things, and as much feared the success of
our cause as the defeat of it. I attached myself to Pompey's party more in
hope of peace than from desire of war; but I saw, if we had the better,
how cruel would be the triumph of an exasperated, avaricious, and insolent
set of men; if we were defeated, how many of our wealthiest and noblest
citizens must fall. Yet when I argued thus and offered my advice I was
taunted for being a coward."

_Cicero to Caius Cassius_.[8]

"We were both opposed to a continuance of the war [after Pharsalia]. I,
perhaps, more than you; but we agreed that one battle should be accepted
as decisive, if not of the whole cause, yet of our own judgment upon it.
Nor were there any who differed from us save those who thought it better
that the Constitution should be destroyed altogether than be preserved
with diminished prerogatives. For myself I could hope nothing from the
overthrow of it, and much if a remnant could be saved.... And I thought it
likely that, after that decisive battle, the victors would consider the
welfare of the public, and that the vanquished would consider their own."

_To Varro_.[9]

"You were absent [at the critical moment]. I for myself perceived that our
friends wanted war, and that Caesar did not want it, but was not afraid of
it. Thus much of human purpose was in the matter. The rest came
necessarily; for one side or the other would, of course, conquer. You and
I both grieved to see how the State would suffer from the loss of either
army and its generals; we knew that victory in a civil war was itself a
most miserable disaster. I dreaded the success of those to whom I had
attached myself. They threatened most cruelly those who had stayed quietly
at home. Your sentiments and my speeches were alike hateful to them. If
our side had won, they would have shown no forbearance."

_To Marcus Marius_.[10]

"When you met me on the 13th of May (49), you were anxious about the part
which I was to take. If I stayed in Italy, you feared that I should be
wanting in duty. To go to the war you thought dangerous for me. I was
myself so disturbed that I could not tell what it was best for me to do. I
consulted my reputation, however, more than my safety; and if I afterwards
repented of my decision it was not for the peril to myself, but on account
of the state of things which I found on my arrival at Pompey's camp. His
forces were not very considerable, nor good of their kind. For the chiefs,
if I except the general and a few others, they were rapacious in their
conduct of the war, and so savage in their language that I dreaded to see
them victorious. The most considerable among them were overwhelmed with
debt. There was nothing good about them but their cause. I despaired of
success and recommended peace. When Pompey would not hear of it, I advised
him to protract the war. This for the time he approved, and he might have
continued firm but for the confidence which he gathered from the battle at
Durazzo. From that day the great man ceased to be a general. With a raw
and inexperienced army he engaged legions in perfect discipline. On the
defeat he basely deserted his camp and fled by himself. For me this was
the end: I retired from a war in which the only alternatives before me
were either to be killed in action or be taken prisoner, or fly to Juba in
Africa, or hide in exile, or destroy myself."

_To Caecina_.[11]

"I would tell you my prophecies but that you would think I had made them
after the event. But many persons can bear me witness that I first warned
Pompey against attaching himself to Caesar, and then against quarrelling
with him. Their union (I said) had broken the power of the Senate; their
discord would cause a civil war. I was intimate with Caesar; I was most
attached to Pompey; but my advice was for the good of them both.... I
thought that Pompey ought to go to Spain. Had he done so, the war would
not have been. I did not so much insist that Caesar could legally stand
for the consulship as that his name should be accepted, because the people
had so ordered at Pompey's own instance. I advised, I entreated. I
preferred the most unfair peace to the most righteous war. I was
overborne, not so much by Pompey (for on him I produced an effect) as by
men who relied on Pompey's leadership to win them a victory, which would
be convenient for their personal interests and private ambitions. No
misfortune has happened in the war which I did not predict."


[1] _To Atticus_, ix. 18.

[2] "Tullia bids me wait till I see how things go in Spain, and she says
    you are of the same opinion. The advice would be good, if I could
    adapt my conduct to the issue of events there. But one of three
    alternatives must happen. Either Caesar will be driven back, which
    would please me best, or the war will be protracted, or he will be
    completely victorious. If he is defeated, Pompey will thank me little
    for joining him. Curio himself will then go over to him. If the war
    hangs on, how long am I to wait? If Caesar conquers, it is thought we
    may then have peace. But I consider, on the other hand, that it would
    be more decent to forsake Caesar in success than when beaten and in
    difficulties. The victory of Caesar means massacre, confiscation,
    recall of exiles, a clean sweep of debts, every worst man raised to
    honor, and a rule which not only a Roman citizen but a Persian could
    not endure.... Pompey will not lay down his arms for the loss of
    Spain; he holds with Themistocles that those who are masters at sea
    will be the victors in the end. He has neglected Spain. He has given
    all his care to his ships. When the time comes he will return to Italy
    with an overwhelming fleet. And what will he say to me if he finds me
    still sitting here?--Let alone duty, I must think of the danger....
    Every course has its perils; but I should surely avoid a course which
    is both ignominious and perilous also.

    "I did not accompany Pompey when he went himself? I could not. I had
    not time. And yet, to confess the truth, I made a mistake which,
    perhaps, I should not have made. I thought there would be peace, and I
    would not have Caesar angry with me after he and Pompey had become
    friends again. Thus I hesitated; but I can overtake my fault if I lose
    no more time, and I am lost if I delay.--I see that Caesar cannot
    stand long. He will fall of himself if we do nothing. When his affairs
    were most flourishing, he became unpopular with the hungry rabble of
    the city in six or seven days. He could not keep up the mask. His
    harshness to Metellus destroyed his credit for clemency, and his
    taking money from the treasury destroyed his reputation for riches.

    "As to his followers, how can men govern provinces who cannot manage
    their own affairs for two months together? Such a monarchy could not
    last half a year. The wisest men have miscalculated.... If that is my
    case, I must bear the reproach ... but I am sure it will be as I say.
    Caesar will fall, either by his enemies or by himself, who is his
    worst enemy.... I hope I may live to see it, though you and I should
    be thinking more of the other life than of this transitory one: but so
    it come, no matter whether I see it or foresee it."--_To
    Atticus_, x. 8.

[3] "Nam hic nunc praeter foeneratores paucos nec homo nec ordo quisquam
    est nisi Pompeianus. Equidem jam effeci ut maxime plebs et qui antea
    noster fuit populus vester esset."--Caelius to Cicero, _Ad Fam_.,
    viii. 71.

[4] Caesar says nothing of his putting to sea in a boat, meaning to go
    over in person, and being driven back by the weather. The story is
    probably no more than one of the picturesque additions to reality made
    by men who find truth too tame for them.

[5] I follow Caesar's own account of the action. Appian is minutely
    circumstantial, and professes to describe from the narratives of eye-
    witnesses. But his story varies so far from Caesar's as to be
    irreconcilable with it, and Caesar's own authority is incomparably the
    best.

[6] Suetonius, quoting from Asinius Pollio, who was present at the battle.

[7] _Ad Familiares_, iv. 14.

[8] _Ibid_., xv. 15.

[9] _Ad Fam_., ix. 6.

[10] _Ibid_., vii. 3.

[11] _Ad Fam_., vi. 6.




CHAPTER XXIII.


The strength of the senatorial party lay in Pompey's popularity in the
East. A halo was still supposed to hang about him as the creator of the
Eastern Empire, and so long as he was alive and at liberty there was
always a possibility that he might collect a new army. To overtake him, to
reason with him, and, if reason failed, to prevent him by force from
involving himself and the State in fresh difficulties, was Caesar's first
object. Pompey, it was found, had ridden from the battlefield direct to
the sea, attended by a handful of horse. He had gone on board a grain
vessel, which carried him to Amphipolis. At Amphipolis he had stayed but a
single night, and had sailed for Mitylene, where he had left his wife and
his sons. The last accounts which the poor lady had heard of him had been
such as reached Lesbos after the affair at Durazzo. Young patricians had
brought her word that her husband had gained a glorious victory, that he
had joined her father, Metellus Scipio, and that together they were
pursuing Caesar with the certainty of overwhelming him. Rumor, cruel as
usual,

    Had brought smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.

Rumor had told Cornelia that Caesar had "stooped his head" before Pompey's
"rage." Pompey came in person to inform her of the miserable reality. At
Mitylene Pompey's family were no longer welcome guests. They joined him on
board his ship to share his fortunes, but what those fortunes were to be
was all uncertain. Asia had seemed devoted to him. To what part of it
should he go? To Cilicia? to Syria? to Armenia? To Parthia? For even
Parthia was thought of. Unhappily the report of Pharsalia had flown before
him, and the vane of sentiment had everywhere veered round. The Aegean
islands begged him politely not to compromise them by his presence. He
touched at Rhodes. Lentulus, flying from the battlefield, had tried Rhodes
before him, and had been requested to pass on upon his way. Lentulus was
said to be gone to Egypt. Polite to Pompey the Rhodians were, but perhaps
he was generously unwilling to involve them in trouble in his behalf. He
went on to Cilicia, the scene of his old glory in the pirate wars. There
he had meant to land and take refuge either with the Parthians or with one
of the allied princes. But in Cilicia he heard that Antioch had declared
for Caesar. Allies and subjects, as far as he could learn, were all for
Caesar. Egypt, whither Lentulus had gone, appeared the only place where he
could surely calculate on being welcome. Ptolemy the Piper, the occasion
of so much scandal, was no longer living, but he owed the recovery of his
throne to Pompey. Gabinius had left a few thousand of Pompey's old
soldiers at Alexandria to protect him against his subjects. These men had
married Egyptian wives and had adopted Egyptian habits, but they could not
have forgotten their old general. They were acting as guards at present to
Ptolemy's four children, two girls, Cleopatra and Arsinoe, and two boys,
each called Ptolemy. The father had bequeathed the crown to the two elder
ones, Cleopatra, who was turned sixteen, and a brother two years younger.
Here at least, among these young princes and their guardians, who had been
their father's friends, their father's greatest benefactor might count
with confidence on finding hospitality.

For Egypt, therefore, Pompey sailed, taking his family along with him. He
had collected a few ships and 2,000 miscellaneous followers, and with them
he arrived off Pelusium, the modern Damietta. His forlorn condition was a
punishment sufficiently terrible for the vanity which had flung his
country into war. But that it had been his own doing the letters of Cicero
prove with painful clearness; and though he had partially seen his error
at Capua, and would then have possibly drawn back, the passions and hopes
which he had excited had become too strong for him to contend against.
From the day of his flight from Italy he had been as a leaf whirled upon a
winter torrent. Plain enough it had long been to him that he would not be
able to govern the wild forces of a reaction which, if it had prevailed,
would have brought back a more cruel tyranny than Sylla's. He was now
flung as a waif on the shore of a foreign land; and if Providence on each
occasion proportioned the penalties of misdoing to the magnitude of the
fault, it might have been considered that adequate retribution had been
inflicted on him. But the consequences of the actions of men live when the
actions are themselves forgotten, and come to light without regard to the
fitness of the moment. The senators of Rome were responsible for the
exactions which Ptolemy Auletes had been compelled to wring out of his
subjects. Pompey himself had entertained and supported him in Rome when he
was driven from his throne, and had connived at the murder of the
Alexandrians who had been sent to remonstrate against his restoration. It
was by Pompey that he had been forced again upon his miserable subjects,
and had been compelled to grind them with fresh extortions. It was not
unnatural under these circumstances that the Egyptians were eager to free
themselves from a subjection which bore more heavily on them than
annexation to the Empire. A national party had been formed on Ptolemy's
death to take advantage of the minority of his children. Cleopatra had
been expelled. The Alexandrian citizens kept her brother in their hands,
and were now ruling in his name; the demoralized Roman garrison had been
seduced into supporting them, and they had an army lying at the time at
Pelusium, to guard against Cleopatra and her friends.

Of all this Pompey knew nothing. When he arrived off the port he learnt
that the young king with a body of troops was in the neighborhood, and he
sent on shore to ask permission to land. The Egyptians had already heard
of Pharsalia. Civil war among the Romans was an opportunity for them to
assert their independence, or to secure their liberties by taking the side
which seemed most likely to be successful. Lentulus had already arrived,
and had been imprisoned--a not unnatural return for the murder of Dion and
his fellow-citizens. Pompey, whose name more than that of any other Roman
was identified with their sufferings, was now placing himself
spontaneously in their hands. Why, by sparing him, should they neglect the
opportunity of avenging their own wrongs, and of earning, as they might
suppose that they would, the lasting gratitude of Caesar? The Roman
garrison had no feeling for their once glorious commander. "In calamity,"
Caesar observes, "friends easily become foes." The guardians of the young
king sent a smooth answer, bidding Pompey welcome. The water being
shallow, they despatched Achillas, a prefect in the king's army, and
Septimius, a Roman officer, whom Pompey personally knew, with a boat to
conduct him on shore. His wife and friends distrusted the tone of the
reception, and begged him to wait till he could land with his own guard.
The presence of Septimius gave Pompey confidence. Weak men, when in
difficulties, fall into a kind of despairing fatalism, as if tired of
contending longer with adverse fortune. Pompey stepped into the boat, and
when out of arrow-shot from the ship was murdered under his wife's eyes.
His head was cut off and carried away. His body was left lying on the
sands. A man who had been once his slave, and had been set free by him,
gathered a few sticks and burnt it there; and thus the last rites were
bestowed upon one whom, a few months before, Caesar himself would have
been content to acknowledge as his superior.

So ended Pompey the Great. History has dealt tenderly with him on account
of his misfortunes, and has not refused him deserved admiration for
qualities as rare in his age as they were truly excellent. His capacities
as a soldier were not extraordinary. He had risen to distinction by his
honesty. The pirates who had swept the Mediterranean had bought their
impunity by a tribute paid to senators and governors. They were suppressed
instantly when a commander was sent against them whom they were unable to
bribe. The conquest of Asia was no less easy to a man who could resist
temptations to enrich himself. The worst enemy of Pompey never charged him
with corruption or rapacity. So far as he was himself concerned, the
restoration of Ptolemy was gratuitous, for he received nothing for it. His
private fortune, when he had the world at his feet, was never more than
moderate; nor as a politician did his faults extend beyond weakness and
incompetence. Unfortunately he had acquired a position by his negative
virtues which was above his natural level, and misled him into overrating
his capabilities. So long as he stood by Caesar he had maintained his
honor and his authority. He allowed men more cunning than himself to play
upon his vanity, and Pompey fell--fell amidst the ruins of a Constitution
which had been undermined by the villanies of its representatives. His end
was piteous, but scarcely tragic, for the cause to which he was sacrificed
was too slightly removed from being ignominious. He was no Phoebus Apollo
sinking into the ocean, surrounded with glory. He was not even a brilliant
meteor. He was a weak, good man, whom accident had thrust into a place to
which he was unequal; and ignorant of himself, and unwilling to part with
his imaginary greatness, he was flung down with careless cruelty by the
forces which were dividing the world. His friend Lentulus shared his fate,
and was killed a few days later, while Pompey's ashes were still smoking.
Two of Bibulus's sons, who had accompanied him, were murdered as well.

Caesar meanwhile had followed along Pompey's track, hoping to overtake
him. In Cilicia he heard where he was gone; and learning something more
accurately there of the state of Egypt, he took two legions with him, one
of which had attended him from Pharsalia, and another which he had sent
for from Achaia. With these he sailed for Alexandria. Together, so much
had they been thinned by hard service, these legions mustered between them
little over 3,000 men. The force was small, but Caesar considered that,
after Pharsalia, there could be no danger for him anywhere in the
Mediterranean. He landed without opposition, and was presented on his
arrival, as a supposed welcome offering, with the head of his rival.
Politically it would have been better far for him to have returned to Rome
with Pompey as a friend. Nor, if it had been certain that Pompey would
have refused to be reconciled, were services such as this a road to
Caesar's favor. The Alexandrians speedily found that they were not to be
rewarded with the desired independence. The consular fasces, the emblem of
the hated Roman authority, were carried openly before Caesar when he
appeared in the streets; and it was not long before mobs began to assemble
with cries that Egypt was a free country, and that the people would not
allow their king to be insulted. Evidently there was business to be done
in Egypt before Caesar could leave it. Delay was specially inconvenient. A
prolonged absence from Italy would allow faction time to rally again. But
Caesar did not look on himself as the leader of a party, but as the
guardian of Roman interests, and it was not his habit to leave any
necessary work uncompleted. The etesian winds, too, had set in, which made
it difficult for his heavy vessels to work out of the harbor. Seeing that
troubles might rise, he sent a message to Mithridates of Pergamus,[1]
to bring him reinforcements from Syria, while he himself at once took the
government of Egypt into his hands. He forbade the Alexandrians to set
aside Ptolemy's will, and insisted that the sovereignty must be vested
jointly in Cleopatra and her brother as their father had ordered.[2]he
cries of discontent grew bolder. Alexandria was a large, populous city,
the common receptacle of vagabonds from all parts of the Mediterranean.
Pirates, thieves, political exiles, and outlaws had taken refuge there,
and had been received into the king's service. With the addition of the
dissolute legionaries left by Gabinius, they made up 20,000 as dangerous
ruffians as had ever been gathered into a single city. The more
respectable citizens had no reason to love the Romans. The fate of Cyprus
seemed a foreshadowing of their own. They too, unless they looked to
themselves, would be absorbed in the devouring Empire. They had made an
end of Pompey, and Caesar had shown no gratitude. Caesar himself was now
in their hands. Till the wind changed they thought that he could not
escape, and they were tempted, naturally enough, to use the chance which
fate had given them.

Pothinus, a palace eunuch and one of young Ptolemy's guardians, sent
secretly for the troops at Pelusium, and gave the command of them to
Achillas, the officer who had murdered Pompey. The city rose when they
came in, and Caesar found himself blockaded in the palace and the part of
the city which joined the outer harbor. The situation was irritating from
its absurdity, but more or less it was really dangerous. The Egyptian
fleet which had been sent to Greece in aid of Pompey had come back, and
was in the inner basin. It outnumbered Caesar's, and the Alexandrians were
the best seamen in the Mediterranean. If they came out, they might cut his
communications. Without hesitation he set fire to the docks; burnt or
disabled the great part of the ships; seized the Pharos and the mole which
connected it with the town; fortified the palace and the line of houses
occupied by his troops; and in this position he remained for several
weeks, defending himself against the whole power of Egypt. Of the time in
which legend describes him as abandoned to his love for Cleopatra, there
was hardly an hour of either day or night in which he was not fighting for
his very life. The Alexandrians were ingenious and indefatigable. They
pumped the sea into the conduits which supplied his quarters with water,
for a moment it seemed with fatal effect. Fresh water was happily found by
sinking wells. They made a new fleet; old vessels on the stocks were
launched, others were brought down from the canals on the river. They made
oars and spars out of the benches and tables of the professors' lecture
rooms. With these they made desperate attempts to retake the mole. Once
with a sudden rush they carried a ship, in which Caesar was present in
person, and he was obliged to swim for his life.[3] Still, he held on,
keeping up his men's spirits, and knowing that relief must arrive in time.
He was never greater than in unlooked-for difficulties. He never rested.
He was always inventing some new contrivance. He could have retired from
the place with no serious loss. He could have taken to his ships and
forced his way to sea in spite of the winds and the Alexandrians. But he
felt that to fly from such an enemy would dishonor the Roman name, and he
would not entertain the thought of it.

[Sidenote: B.C. 47.]
The Egyptians made desperate efforts to close the harbor. Finding that
they could neither capture the Pharos nor make an impression on Caesar's
lines, they affected to desire peace. Caesar had kept young Ptolemy with
him as a security. They petitioned that he should be given up to them,
promising on compliance to discontinue their assaults. Caesar did not
believe them. But the boy was of no use to him; the army wished him gone,
for they thought him treacherous; and his presence would not strengthen
the enemy. Caesar, says Hirtius, considered that it would be more
respectable to be fighting with a king than with a gang of ruffians. Young
Ptolemy was released, and joined his countrymen, and the war went on more
fiercely than before. Pompey's murderers were brought to justice in the
course of it. Pothinus fell into Caesar's hands, and was executed.
Ganymede, another eunuch, assassinated Achillas, and took his place as
commander-in-chief. Reinforcements began to come in. Mithridates had not
yet been heard of; but Domitius Calvinus, who had been left in charge of
Asia Minor, and to whom Caesar had also sent, had despatched two legions
to him. One arrived by sea at Alexandria, and was brought in with some
difficulty. The other was sent by land, and did not arrive in time to be
of service. There was a singular irony in Caesar being left to struggle
for months with a set of miscreants, but the trial came to an end at last.
Mithridates, skilful, active, and faithful, had raised a force with
extraordinary rapidity in Cilicia and on the Euphrates. He had marched
swiftly through Syria; and in the beginning of the new year Caesar heard
the welcome news that he had reached Pelusium, and had taken it by storm.
Not delaying for a day, Mithridates had gone up the bank of the Nile to
Cairo. A division of the Egyptian army lay opposite to him, in the face of
whom he did not think it prudent to attempt to cross, and from thence he
sent word of his position to Caesar. The news reached Caesar and the
Alexandrians at the same moment. The Alexandrians had the easiest access
to the scene. They had merely to ascend the river in their boats. Caesar
was obliged to go round by sea to Pelusium, and to follow the course which
Mithridates had taken himself. Rapidity of movement made up the
difference. Taking with him such cohorts as could be spared from his
lines, Caesar had joined Mithridates before the Alexandrians had arrived.
Together they forced the passage; and Ptolemy came only for his camp to be
stormed, his army to be cut to pieces, and himself to be drowned in the
Nile, and so end his brief and miserable life.

Alexandria immediately capitulated. Arsinoe, the youngest sister, was sent
to Rome. Cleopatra and her surviving brother were made joint sovereigns;
and Roman rumor, glad to represent Caesar's actions in monstrous
characters, insisted in after years that they were married. The absence of
contemporary authority for the story precludes also the possibility of
denying it. Two legions were left in Egypt to protect them if they were
faithful, or to coerce them if they misconducted themselves. The
Alexandrian episode was over, and Caesar sailed for Syria. His long
detention over a complication so insignificant had been unfortunate in
many ways. Scipio and Cato, with the other fugitives from Pharsalia, had
rallied in Africa, under the protection of Juba. Italy was in confusion.
The popular party, now absolutely in the ascendant, were disposed to treat
the aristocracy as the aristocracy would have treated them had they been
victorious. The controlling hand was absent; the rich, long hated and
envied, were in the power of the multitude, and wild measures were
advocated, communistic, socialistic, such as are always heard of in
revolutions, meaning in one form or another the equalization of wealth,
the division of property, the poor taking their turn on the upper crest of
fortune and the rich at the bottom. The tribunes were outbidding one
another in extravagant proposals, while Caesar's legions, sent home from
Greece to rest after their long service, were enjoying their victory in
the license which is miscalled liberty. They demanded the lands, or
rewards in money, which had been promised them at the end of the war.
Discipline was relaxed or abandoned. Their officers wore unable, perhaps
unwilling, to control them. They, too, regarded the Commonwealth as a
spoil which their swords had won, and which they were entitled to
distribute among themselves.

In Spain, too, a bad feeling had revived. After Caesar's departure his
generals had oppressed the people, and had quarrelled with one another.
The country was disorganized and disaffected. In Spain, as in Egypt, there
was a national party still dreaming of independence. The smouldering
traditions of Sertorius were blown into flame by the continuance of the
civil war. The proud motley race of Spaniards, Italians, Gauls, indigenous
mountaineers, Moors from Africa, the remnants of the Carthaginian
colonies, however they might hate one another, yet united in resenting an
uncertain servitude under the alternate ascendency of Roman factions.
Spain was ripe for revolt. Gaul alone, Caesar's own province, rewarded him
for the use which he had made of his victory, by unswerving loyalty and
obedience.

On his landing in Syria, Caesar found letters pressing for his instant
return to Rome. Important persons were waiting to give him fuller
information than could be safely committed to writing. He would have
hastened home at once, but restless spirits had been let loose everywhere
by the conflict of the Roman leaders. Disorder had broken out near at
hand. The still recent defeat of Crassus had stirred the ambition of the
Asiatic princes; and to leave the Eastern frontier disturbed was to risk a
greater danger to the Empire than was to be feared from the impatient
politics of the Roman mob, or the dying convulsions of the aristocracy.

Pharnaces, a legitimate son of Mithridates the Great, had been left
sovereign of Upper Armenia. He had watched the collision between Pompey
and Caesar with a neutrality which was to plead for him with the
conqueror, and he had intended to make his own advantage out of the
quarrels between his father's enemies. Deiotarus, tributary king of Lower
Armenia and Colchis, had given some help to Pompey, and had sent him men
and money; and on Pompey's defeat, Pharnaces had supposed that he might
seize on Deiotarus's territories without fear of Caesar's resentment.
Deiotarus had applied to Domitius Calvinus for assistance; which Calvinus,
weakened as he was by the despatch of two of his legions to Egypt, had
been imperfectly able to give. Pharnaces had advanced into Cappadocia.
When Calvinus ordered him to retire, he had replied by sending presents,
which had hitherto proved so effective with Roman proconsuls, and by an
equivocating profession of readiness to abide by Caesar's decision.
Pharnaces came of a dangerous race. Caesar's lieutenant was afraid that,
if he hesitated, the son of Mithridates might become as troublesome as his
father had been. He refused the presents. Disregarding his weakness, he
sent a peremptory command to Pharnaces to fall back within his own
frontiers, and advanced to compel him if he refused. In times of
excitement the minds of men are electric, and news travels with
telegraphic rapidity if not with telegraphic accuracy. Pharnaces heard
that Caesar was shut up in Alexandria and was in a position of extreme
danger, that he had sent for all his Asiatic legions, and that Calvinus
had himself been summoned to his assistance. Thus he thought that he might
safely postpone compliance till the Roman army was gone, and he had the
country to himself. The reports from Egypt were so unfavorable that,
although as yet he had received no positive orders, Calvinus was in daily
expectation that he would be obliged to go. It would be unsafe, he
thought, to leave an insolent barbarian unchastised. He had learnt in
Caesar's school to strike quickly. He had not learnt the comparison
between means and ends, without which celerity is imprudence. He had but
one legion left; but he had a respectable number of Asiatic auxiliaries,
and with them he ventured to attack Pharnaces in an intricate position.
His Asiatics deserted. The legion behaved admirably; but in the face of
overwhelming numbers, it could do no more than cut its way to security.
Pharnaces at once reclaimed his father's kingdom, and overran Pontus,
killing, mutilating, or imprisoning every Roman that he encountered; and
in this condition Caesar found Asia Minor on his coming to Syria.

It was not in Caesar's character to leave a Roman Province behind him in
the hands of an invader, for his own political interests. He saw that he
must punish Pharnaces before he returned to Rome, and he immediately
addressed himself to the work. He made a hasty progress through the Syrian
towns, hearing complaints and distributing rewards and promotions. The
allied chiefs came to him from the borders of the Province to pay their
respects. He received them graciously, and dismissed them pleased and
satisfied. After a few days spent thus, he sailed for Cilicia, held a
council at Tarsus, and then crossed the Taurus, and went by forced marches
through Cappadocia to Pontus. He received a legion from Deiotarus which
had been organized in Roman fashion. He sent to Calvinus to meet him with
the survivors of his lost battle; and when they arrived, he reviewed the
force which was at his disposition. It was not satisfactory. He had
brought a veteran legion with him from Egypt, but it was reduced to a
thousand strong. He had another which he had taken up in Syria; but even
this did not raise his army to a point which could assure him of success.
But time pressed, and skill might compensate for defective numbers.

Pharnaces, hearing that Caesar was at hand, promised submission. He sent
Caesar a golden crown, in anticipation perhaps that he was about to make
himself king. He pleaded his desertion of Pompey as a set-off against his
faults. Caesar answered that he would accept the submission, if it were
sincere; but Pharnaces must not suppose that good offices to himself could
atone for injuries to the Empire.[4] The provinces which he had invaded
must be instantly evacuated; his Roman prisoners must be released, and
their property must be restored to them.

Pharnaces was a politician, and knew enough of Caesar's circumstances to
mislead him. The state of Rome required Caesar's presence. A campaign in
Asia would occupy more time than he could afford, and Pharnaces calculated
that he must be gone in a few days or weeks. The victory over Calvinus had
strengthened his ambition of emulating his father. He delayed his answer,
shifted from place to place, and tried to protract the correspondence till
Caesar's impatience to be gone should bring him to agree to a compromise.

Caesar cut short negotiations. Pharnaces was at Zela, a town in the midst
of mountains behind Trebizond, and the scene of a great victory which had
been won by Mithridates over the Romans. Caesar defied auguries. He seized
a position at night on the brow of a hill directly opposite to the
Armenian camp, and divided from it by a narrow valley. As soon as day
broke the legions were busy intrenching with their spades and pickaxes.
Pharnaces, with the rashness which if it fails is madness, and if it
succeeds is the intuition of genius, decided to fall on them at a moment
when no sane person could rationally expect an attack; and Caesar could
not restrain his astonishment when he saw the enemy pouring down the steep
side of the ravine, and breasting the ascent on which he stood. It was
like the battle of Maubeuge over again, with the difference that he had
here to deal with Asiatics, and not with the Nervii. There was some
confusion while the legions were exchanging their digging tools for their
arms. When the exchange had been made, there was no longer a battle, but a
rout. The Armenians were hurled back down the hill, and slaughtered in
masses at the bottom of it. The camp was taken. Pharnaces escaped for the
moment, and made his way into his own country; but he was killed
immediately after, and Asia Minor was again at peace.

Caesar, calm as usual, but well satisfied to have ended a second awkward
business so easily, passed quickly down to the Hellespont, and had landed
in Italy before it was known that he had left Pontus.


[1] Supposed to have been a natural son of Mithridates the Great. The
    reason for the special confidence which Caesar placed in him does not
    appear. The danger at Alexandria, perhaps, did not appear at the
    moment particularly serious.

[2] Roman scandal discovered afterward that Caesar had been fascinated by
    the charms of Cleopatra, and allowed his politics to be influenced by
    a love affair. Roman fashionable society hated Caesar, and any carrion
    was welcome to them which would taint his reputation. Cleopatra
    herself favored the story, and afterward produced a child, whom she
    named Caesarion. Oppius, Caesar's most intimate friend, proved that
    the child could not have been his--of course, therefore, that the
    intrigue was a fable; and the boy was afterward put to death by
    Augustus as an impostor. No one claims immaculate virtue for Caesar.
    An amour with Cleopatra may have been an accident of his presence in
    Alexandria. But to suppose that such a person as Caesar, with the
    concerns of the world upon his hands, would have allowed his public
    action to be governed by a connection with a loose girl of sixteen is
    to make too large a demand upon human credulity; nor is it likely
    that, in a situation of so much danger and difficulty as that in which
    he found himself, he would have added to his embarrassments by
    indulging in an intrigue. The report proves nothing, for whether true
    or false it was alike certain to arise. The _salons_ of Rome,
    like the _salons_ of London and Paris, took their revenge on
    greatness by soiling it with filth; and happily Suetonius, the chief
    authority for the scandal, couples it with a story which is
    demonstrably false. He says that Caesar made a long expedition with
    Cleopatra in a barge upon the Nile; that he was so fascinated with her
    that he wished to extend his voyage to Aethiopia, and was prevented
    only by the refusal of his army to follow him. The details of Caesar's
    stay at Alexandria, so minutely given by Hirtius, show that there was
    not a moment when such an expedition could have been contemplated.
    During the greater part of the time he was blockaded in the palace.
    Immediately after the insurrection was put down, he was obliged to
    hurry off on matters of instant and urgent moment. Of the story of
    Cleopatra's presence in Rome at the time of his murder, more will be
    said hereafter.

[3] Legend is more absurd than usual over this incident. It pretends that
    he swam with one hand, and carried his Commentaries, holding them
    above water, with the other. As if a general would take his MSS. with
    him into a hot action!

[4] "Neque provinciarum injurias condonari iis posse qui fuissent in se
    officiosi."--_De Bello Alexandrino_, 70.




CHAPTER XXIV.


Cicero considered that the Civil War ought to have ended with Pharsalia;
and in this opinion most reasonable men among the conservatives were
agreed. They had fought one battle; and it had gone against them. To
continue the struggle might tear the Empire to pieces, but could not
retrieve a lost cause; and prudence and patriotism alike recommended
submission to the verdict of fortune. It is probable that this would have
been the result, could Caesar have returned to Italy immediately after his
victory. Cicero himself refused to participate in further resistance. Cato
offered him a command at Corcyra, but he declined it with a shudder, and
went back to Brindisi; and all but those whose consciences forbade them to
hope for pardon, or who were too proud to ask for it, at first followed
his example. Scipio, Cato, Labienus, Afranius, Petreius, were resolute to
fight on to the last; but even they had no clear outlook, and they
wandered about the Mediterranean, uncertain what to do, or whither to
turn. Time went on, however, and Caesar did not appear. Rumor said at one
time that he was destroyed at Alexandria. The defeat of Calvinus by
Pharnaces was an ascertained fact. Spain was in confusion. The legions in
Italy were disorganized, and society, or the wealthy part of society,
threatened by the enemies of property, began to call for some one to save
it. All was not lost. Pompey's best generals were still living. His sons,
Sextus and Cnaeus, were brave and able. The fleet was devoted to them and
to their father's cause, and Caesar's officers had failed, in his absence,
to raise a naval force which could show upon the sea. Africa was a
convenient rallying point. Since Curio's defeat, King Juba had found no
one to dispute his supremacy, and between Juba and the aristocracy who
were bent on persisting in the war, an alliance was easily formed. While
Caesar was perilling his own interest to remain in Asia to crush
Pharnaces, Metellus Scipio was offering a barbarian chief the whole of
Roman Africa, as the price of his assistance, in a last effort to reverse
the fortune of Pharsalia. Under these scandalous conditions, Scipio,
Labienus, Cato, Afranius, Petreius, Faustus Sylla, the son of the
Dictator, Lucius Caesar, and the rest of the irreconcilables, made Africa
their new centre of operations. Here they gathered to themselves the
inheritors of the Syllan traditions, and made raids on the Italian coasts
and into Sicily and Sardinia. Seizing Caesar's officers when they could
find them, they put them invariably to death without remorse. Cicero
protested honorably against the employment of treacherous savages, even
for so sacred a cause as the defence of the constitution;[1] but Cicero
was denounced as a traitor seeking favor with the conqueror, and the
desperate work went on. Caesar's long detention in the East gave the
confederates time. The young Pompeys were strong at sea. From Italy there
was an easy passage for adventurous disaffection. The shadow of a Pompeian
Senate sat once more, passing resolutions, at Utica; while Cato was busy
organizing an army, and had collected as many as thirteen legions out of
the miscellaneous elements which drifted in to him. Caesar had sent orders
to Cassius Longinus to pass into Africa from Spain, and break up these
combinations; but Longinus had been at war with his own provincials. He
had been driven out of the Peninsula, and had lost his own life in leaving
it. Caesar, like Cicero, had believed that the war had ended at Pharsalia.
He found that the heads of the Hydra had sprouted again, and were vomiting
the old fire and fury. Little interest could it give Caesar to match his
waning years against the blinded hatred of his countrymen. Ended the
strife must be, however, before order could be restored in Italy, and
wretched men take up again the quiet round of industry. Heavy work had to
be done in Rome. Caesar was consul now--annual consul, with no ten years'
interval any longer possible. Consul, dictator, whatever name the people
gave him, he alone held the reins; he alone was able to hold them. Credit
had to be restored; debtors had to be brought to recognize their
liabilities. Property had fallen in value since the Civil Wars, and
securities had to be freshly estimated. The Senate required reformation;
men of fidelity and ability were wanted for the public offices. Pompey and
Pompey's friends would have drowned Italy in blood. Caesar disappointed
expectation by refusing to punish any one of his political opponents. He
killed no one. He deprived no one of his property. He even protected the
money-lenders, and made the Jews his constant friends. Debts he insisted
must be paid, bonds fulfilled, the rights of property respected, no matter
what wild hopes imagination might have indulged in. Something only he
remitted of the severity of interest, and the poor in the city were
allowed their lodgings rent free for a year.

He restored quiet, and gave as much satisfaction as circumstances
permitted. His real difficulty was with the legions, who had come back
from Greece. They had deserved admirably well, but they were unfortunately
over-conscious of their merits. Ill-intentioned officers had taught them
to look for extravagant rewards. Their expectations had not been
fulfilled; and when they supposed that their labors were over, they
received orders to prepare for a campaign in Africa. Sallust, the
historian, was in command of their quarters in Campania. They mutinied,
and almost killed him. He fled to Rome. The soldiers of the favored 10th
legion pursued him to the gates, and demanded speech with Caesar. He bade
them come to him, and with his usual fearlessness told them to bring their
swords.

The army was Caesar's life. In the army lay the future of Rome, if Rome
was to have a future. There, if anywhere, the national spirit survived. It
was a trying moment; but there was a calmness in Caesar, a rising from a
profound indifference to what man or fortune could give or take from him,
which no extremity could shake.

The legionaries entered the city, and Caesar directed them to state their
complaints. They spoke of their services and their sufferings. They said
that they had been promised rewards, but their rewards so far had been
words, and they asked for their discharge. They did not really wish for
it. They did not expect it. But they supposed that Caesar could not
dispense with them, and that they might dictate their own terms.

During the wars in Gaul, Caesar had been most munificent to his soldiers.
He had doubled their ordinary pay. He had shared the spoils of his
conquests with them. Time and leisure had alone been wanting to him to
recompense their splendid fidelity in the campaigns in Spain and Greece.
He had treated them as his children; no commander had ever been more
careful of his soldiers' lives; when addressing the army he had called
them always "commilitones," "comrades," "brothers-in-arms."

The familiar word was now no longer heard from him. "You say well,
quirites," [2] he answered; "you have labored hard, and you have
suffered much; you desire your discharge--you have it. I discharge you who
are present. I discharge all who have served their time. You shall have
your recompense. It shall never be said of me that I made use of you when
I was in danger, and was ungrateful to you when the peril was past."

"Quirites" he had called them; no longer Roman legionaries, proud of their
achievements, and glorying in their great commander, but "quirites"--plain
citizens. The sight of Caesar, the familiar form and voice, the words,
every sentence of which they knew that he meant, cut them to the heart.
They were humbled, they begged to be forgiven. They said they would go
with him to Africa, or to the world's end. He did not at once accept their
penitence. He told them that lands had been allotted to every soldier out
of the _ager publicus_, or out of his own personal estates. Suetonius
says that the sections had been carefully taken so as not to disturb
existing occupants; and thus it appeared that he had been thinking of them
and providing for them when they supposed themselves forgotten. Money,
too, he had ready for each, part in hand, part in bonds bearing interest,
to be redeemed when the war should be over. Again, passionately, they
implored to be allowed to continue with him. He relented, but not
entirely.

"Let all go who wish to go," he said; "I will have none serve with me who
serve unwillingly."

"All, all!" they cried; "not one of us will leave you"--and not one went.
The mutiny was the greatest peril, perhaps, to which Caesar had ever been
exposed. No more was said; but Caesar took silent notice of the officers
who had encouraged the discontented spirit. In common things, Dion Cassius
says, he was the kindest and most considerate of commanders. He passed
lightly over small offences; but military rebellion in those who were
really responsible he never forgave.

[Sidenote: B.C. 46.]
The African business could now be attended to. It was again midwinter.
Winter campaigns were trying, but Caesar had hitherto found them answer to
him; the enemy had suffered more than himself; while, as long as an
opposition Senate was sitting across the Mediterranean, intrigue and
conspiracy made security impossible at home. Many a false spirit now
fawning at home on Caesar was longing for his destruction. The army with
which he would have to deal was less respectable than that which Pompey
had commanded at Durazzo, but it was numerically as strong or stronger.
Cato, assisted by Labienus, had formed into legions sixty thousand
Italians. They had a hundred and twenty elephants, and African cavalry in
uncounted multitudes. Caesar perhaps despised an enemy too much whom he
had so often beaten. He sailed from Lilybaeum on the 19th of December,
with a mere handful of men, leaving the rest of his troops to follow as
they could. No rendezvous had been positively fixed, for between the
weather and the enemy it was uncertain where the troops would be able to
land, and the generals of the different divisions were left to their
discretion. Caesar on arriving seized and fortified a defensible spot at
Ruspinum.[3] The other legions dropped in slowly, and before a third of
them had arrived the enemy were swarming about the camp, while the Pompeys
were alert on the water to seize stray transports or provision ships.
There was skirmishing every day in front of Caesar's lines. The Numidian
horse surrounded his thin cohorts like swarms of hornets. Labienus himself
rode up on one occasion to a battalion which was standing still under a
shower of arrows, and asked in mockery who they were. A soldier of the
10th legion lifted his cap that his face might be recognized, hurled his
javelin for answer, and brought Labienus's horse to the ground. But
courage was of no avail in the face of overwhelming numbers. Scipio's army
collected faster than Caesar's, and Caesar's young soldiers showed some
uneasiness in a position so unexpected. Caesar, however, was confident and
in high spirits.[4] Roman residents in the African province came gradually
in to him, and some African tribes, out of respect, it was said, for the
memory of Marius. A few towns declared against the Senate in indignation
at Scipio's promise that the province was to be abandoned to Juba. Scipio
replied with burning the Roman country houses and wasting the lands, and
still killing steadily every friend of Caesar that he could lay hands on.
Caesar's steady clemency had made no difference. The senatorial faction
went on as they had begun till at length their ferocity was repaid upon
them.

The reports from the interior became unbearable. Caesar sent an impatient
message to Sicily that, storm or calm, the remaining legions must come to
him, or not a house would be left standing in the province. The officers
were no longer what they had been. The men came, but bringing only their
arms and tools, without change of clothes and without tents, though it was
the rainy season. Good will and good hearts, however, made up for other
shortcomings. Deserters dropped in thick from the Senate's army. King
Juba, it appeared, had joined them, and Roman pride had been outraged,
when Juba had been seen taking precedence in the council of war, and
Metellus Scipio exchanging his imperial purple in the royal presence for a
plain dress of white.

[Sidenote: April 6, B.C. 46.]
The time of clemency was past. Publius Ligarius was taken in a skirmish.
He had been one of the captives at Lerida who had given his word to serve
no further in the war. He was tried for breaking his engagement, and was
put to death. Still, Scipio's army kept the field in full strength, the
loss by desertions being made up by fresh recruits sent from Utica by
Cato. Caesar's men flinched from facing the elephants, and time was lost
while other elephants were fetched from Italy, that they might handle them
and grow familiar with them. Scipio had been taught caution by the fate of
Pompey, and avoided a battle, and thus three months wore away before a
decisive impression had been made. But the clear dark eyes of the
conqueror of Pharsalia had taken the measure of the situation and
comprehended the features of it. By this time he had an effective squadron
of ships, which had swept off Pompey's cruisers; and if Scipio shrank from
an engagement it was possible to force him into it. A division of Scipio's
troops were in the peninsula of Thapsus.[5] If Thapsus was blockaded at
sea and besieged by land, Scipio would be driven to come to its relief,
and would have to fight in the open country. Caesar occupied the neck of
the peninsula, and the result was what he knew it must be. Scipio and Juba
came down out of the hills with their united armies. Their legions were
beginning to form intrenchments, and Caesar was leisurely watching their
operations, when at the sight of the enemy an irresistible enthusiasm ran
through his lines. The cry rose for instant attack; and Caesar, yielding
willingly to the universal impulse, sprang on his horse and led the charge
in person. There was no real fighting. The elephants which Scipio had
placed in front wheeled about and plunged back into the camp, trumpeting
and roaring. The vallum was carried at a rush, and afterward there was
less a battle than a massacre. Officers and men fled for their lives like
frightened antelopes, or flung themselves on their knees for mercy. This
time no mercy was shown. The deliberate cruelty with which the war had
been carried on had done its work at last. The troops were savage, and
killed every man that they overtook. Caesar tried to check the carnage,
but his efforts were unavailing. The leaders escaped for the time by the
speed of their horses. They scattered with a general purpose of making for
Spain. Labienus reached it, but few besides him. Afranius and Faustus
Sylla with a party of cavalry galloped to Utica, which they expected to
hold till one of the Pompeys could bring vessels to take them off. The
Utican towns-people had from the first shown an inclination for Caesar.
Neither they nor any other Romans in Africa liked the prospect of being
passed over to the barbarians.

[Sidenote: B.C. 46.]
Cowards smarting under defeat are always cruel. The fugitives from Thapsus
found that Utica would not be available for their purpose, and in revenge
they began to massacre the citizens. Cato was still in the town. Cato was
one of those better natured men whom revolution yokes so often with base
companionship. He was shocked at the needless cruelty, and bribed the
murderous gang to depart. They were taken soon afterward by Caesar's
cavalry. Afranius and Sylla were brought into the camp as prisoners. There
was a discussion in the camp as to what was to be done with them. Caesar
wished to be lenient, but the feeling in the legions was too strong. The
system of pardons could not be continued in the face of hatred so
envenomed. The two commanders were executed; Caesar contenting himself
with securing Sylla's property for his wife, Pompeia, the great Pompey's
daughter. Cato Caesar was most anxious to save; but Cato's enmity was so
ungovernable that he grudged Caesar the honor of forgiving him. His
animosity had been originally the natural antipathy which a man of narrow
understanding instinctively feels for a man of genius. It had been
converted by perpetual disappointment into a monomania, and Caesar had
become to him the incarnation of every quality and every principle which
he most abhorred. Cato was upright, unselfish, incorruptibly pure in deed
and word; but he was a fanatic whom no experience could teach, and he
adhered to his convictions with the more tenacity, because fortune or the
disposition of events so steadily declared them to be mistaken. He would
have surrendered Caesar to the Germans as a reward for having driven them
back over the Rhine. He was one of those who were most eager to impeach
him for the acts of his consulship, though the acts themselves were such
as, if they had been done by another, he would himself have most warmly
approved; and he was tempted by personal dislike to attach himself to men
whose object was to reimpose upon his country a new tyranny of Sylla. His
character had given respectability to a cause which, if left to its proper
defenders, would have appeared in its natural baseness, and thus on him
rested the responsibility for the color of justice in which it was
disguised. That after all which had passed he should be compelled to
accept his pardon at Caesar's hands was an indignity to which he could not
submit, and before the conqueror could reach Utica he fell upon his sword
and died. _Ultimus Romanorum_ has been the epitaph which posterity
has written on the tomb of Cato. Nobler Romans than he lived after him;
and a genuine son of the old Republic would never have consented to
surrender an imperial province to a barbarian prince. But at least he was
an open enemy. He would not, like his nephew Brutus, have pretended to be
Caesar's friend, that he might the more conveniently drive a dagger into
his side.

The rest of the party was broken up. Scipio sailed for Spain, but was
driven back by foul weather into Hippo, where he was taken and killed. His
correspondence was found and taken to Caesar, who burnt it unread, as he
had burnt Pompey's. The end of Juba and Petreius had a wild splendor about
it. They had fled together from Thapsus to Zama, Juba's own principal
city, and they were refused admission. Disdaining to be taken prisoners,
as they knew they inevitably would be, they went to a country house in the
neighborhood belonging to the king. There, after a last sumptuous banquet,
they agreed to die like warriors by each other's hand. Juba killed
Petreius, and then ran upon his own sword.

So the actors in the drama were passing away. Domitius, Pompey, Lentulus,
Ligarius, Metellus Scipio, Afranius, Cato, Petreius, had sunk into bloody
graves. Labienus had escaped clear from the battle; and knowing that if
Caesar himself would pardon him Caesar's army never would, he made his way
to Spain, where one last desperate hope remained. The mutinous legions of
Cassius Longinus had declared for the Senate. Some remnants of Pompey's
troops who had been dismissed after Lerida had been collected again and
joined them; and these, knowing, as Labienus knew, that they had sinned
beyond forgiveness, were prepared to fight to the last and die at bay.

One memorable scene in the African campaign must not be forgotten. While
Caesar was in difficulty at Ruspinum, and was impatiently waiting for his
legions from Sicily, there arrived a general officer of the 10th, named
Caius Avienus, who had occupied the whole of one of the transports with
his personal servants, horses, and other conveniences, and had not brought
with him a single soldier. Avienus had been already privately noted by
Caesar as having been connected with the mutiny in Campania. His own
habits in the field were simple in the extreme, and he hated to see his
officers self-indulgent. He used the opportunity to make an example of him
and of one or two others at the same time.

He called his tribunes and centurions together. "I could wish," he said,
"that certain persons would have remembered for themselves parts of their
past conduct which, though I overlooked them, were known to me; I could
wish they would have atoned for these faults by special attention to their
duties. As they have not chosen to do this, I must make an example of them
as a warning to others.

"You, Caius Avienus, instigated soldiers in the service of the State to
mutiny against their commanders. You oppressed towns which were under your
charge. Forgetting your duty to the army and to me, you filled a vessel
with your own establishment which was intended for the transport of
troops; and at a difficult moment we were thus left, through your means,
without the men whom we needed. For these causes, and as a mark of
disgrace, I dismiss you from the service, and I order you to leave Africa
by the first ship which sails.

"You, Aulus Fonteius [another tribune], have been a seditious and a bad
officer. I dismiss you also.

"You, Titus Salienus, Marcus Tiro, Caius Clusinas, centurions, obtained
your commissions by favor, not by merit. You have shown want of courage in
the field; your conduct otherwise has been uniformly bad; you have
encouraged a mutinous spirit in your companies. You are unworthy to serve
under my command. You are dismissed, and will return to Italy."

The five offenders were sent under guard on board ship, each noticeably
being allowed a single slave to wait upon him, and so were expelled from
the country.

This remarkable picture of Caesar's method of enforcing discipline is
described by a person who was evidently present;[6] and it may be taken
as a correction to the vague stories of his severity to these officers
which are told by Dion Cassius.

[1] _To Atticus_, xi. 7.

[2] Citizens.

[3] Where the African coast turns south from Cape Bon.

[4] "Animum enim altum et erectum prae se gerebat."--_De Bello
    Africano_.

[5] Between Carthage and Utica.

[6] _De Bella Africano_, c. 54. This remarkably interesting narrative
    is attached to Caesar's _Commentaries_. The author is unknown.




CHAPTER XXV.


[Sidenote: B.C. 45.]
The drift of disaffection into Spain was held at first to be of little
moment. The battle of Thapsus, the final breaking up of the senatorial
party, and the deaths of its leaders, were supposed to have brought an end
at last to the divisions which had so long convulsed the Empire. Rome put
on its best dress. The people had been on Caesar's side from the first.
Those who still nursed in their hearts the old animosity were afraid to
show it, and the nation appeared once more united in enthusiasm for the
conqueror. There were triumphal processions which lasted for four days.
There were sham fights on artificial lakes, bloody gladiator shows, which
the Roman populace looked for as their special delight. The rejoicings
being over, business began. Caesar was, of course, supreme. He was made
inspector of public morals, the censorship being deemed inadequate to curb
the inordinate extravagance. He was named Dictator for ten years, with a
right of nominating the person whom the people were to choose for their
consuls and praetors. The clubs and caucuses, the bribery of the tribes,
the intimidation, the organized bands of voters formed out of the clients
of the aristocracy, were all at an end. The courts of law were purified.
No more judges were to be bought with money or by fouler temptations. The
Leges Julias became a practical reality. One remarkable and darable reform
was undertaken and carried through amidst the jests of Cicero and the
other wits of the time--the revision of the Roman calendar. The
distribution of the year had been governed hitherto by the motions of the
moon. The twelve annual moons had fixed at twelve the number of the
months, and the number of days required to bring the lunar year into
correspondence with the solar had been supplied by irregular
intercalations, at the direction of the Sacred College. But the Sacred
College during the last distracted century had neglected their office. The
lunar year was now sixty-five days in advance of the sun. The so-called
winter was really the autumn, the spring the winter. The summer solstice
fell at the beginning of the legal September. On Caesar as Pontifex
Maximus devolved the duty of bringing confusion into order, and the
completeness with which the work was accomplished at the first moment of
his leisure shows that he had found time in the midst of his campaigns to
think of other things than war or politics. Sosigenes, an Alexandrian
astronomer, was called in to superintend the reform. It is not unlikely
that he had made acquaintance with Sosigenes in Egypt, and had discussed
the problem with him in the hours during which he is supposed to have
amused himself "in the arms of Cleopatra." Sosigenes, leaving the moon
altogether, took the sun for the basis of the new system. The Alexandrian
observers had discovered that the annual course of the sun was completed
in 365 days and six hours. The lunar twelve was allowed to remain to fix
the number of the months. The numbers of days in each month were adjusted
to absorb 365 days. The superfluous hours were allowed to accumulate, and
every fourth year an additional day was to be intercalated. An arbitrary
step was required to repair the negligence of the past. Sixty-five days
had still to be made good. The new system, depending wholly on the sun,
would naturally have commenced with the winter solstice. But Caesar so far
deferred to usage as to choose to begin, not with the solstice itself, but
with the first new moon which followed.  It so happened in that year that
the new moon was eighty days after the solstice; and thus the next year
started, as it continues to start, from the 1st of January. The eight days
were added to the sixty-five, and the current year was lengthened by
nearly three months. It pleased Cicero to mock, as if Caesar, not
contented with the earth, was making himself the master of the heavens.
"Lyra," he said, "was to set according to the edict;" but the unwise man
was not Caesar in this instance.[1]

While Sosigenes was at work with the calendar, Caesar personally again
revised the Senate. He expelled every member who had been guilty of
extortion or corruption; he supplied the vacancies with officers of merit,
with distinguished colonists, with foreigners, with meritorious citizens,
even including Gauls, from all parts of the Empire. Time, unfortunately,
had to pass before these new men could take their places, but meanwhile he
treated the existing body with all forms of respect, and took no step on
any question of public moment till the Senate had deliberated on it. As a
fitting close to the war he proclaimed an amnesty to all who had borne
arms against him. The past was to be forgotten, and all his efforts were
directed to the regeneration of Roman society. Cicero paints the habits of
fashionable life in colors which were possibly exaggerated; but enough
remains of authentic fact to justify the general truth of the picture.
Women had forgotten their honor, children their respect for parents.
Husbands had murdered wives, and wives husbands. Parricide and incest
formed common incidents of domestic Italian history; and, as justice had
been ordered in the last years of the Republic, the most abandoned villain
who came into court with a handful of gold was assured of impunity. Rich
men, says Suetonius, were never deterred from crime by a fear of
forfeiting their estates; they had but to leave Italy, and their property
was secured to them. It was held an extraordinary step toward improvement
when Caesar abolished the monstrous privilege, and ordered that parricides
should not only be exiled, but should forfeit everything that belonged to
them, and that minor felons should forfeit half their estates.

Cicero had prophesied so positively that Caesar would throw off the mask
of clemency when the need for it was gone, that he was disappointed to
find him persevere in the same gentleness, and was impatient for revenge
to begin. So bitter Cicero was that he once told Atticus he could almost
wish himself to be the object of some cruel prosecution, that the tyrant
might have the disgrace of it.[2]

He could not deny that "the tyrant" was doing what, if Rome was to
continue an ordered commonwealth, it was essential must be done. Caesar's
acts were unconstitutional! Yes; but constitutions are made for men, not
men for constitutions, and Cicero had long seen that the Constitution was
at an end. It had died of its own iniquities. He had perceived in his
better moments that Caesar and Caesar only could preserve such degrees of
freedom as could be retained without universal destruction. But he refused
to be comforted. He considered it a disgrace to them all that Caesar was
alive.[3] Why did not somebody kill him? Kill him? And what then? On
that side too the outlook was not promising. News had come that Labienus
and young Cnaeus Pompey had united their forces in Spain. The whole
Peninsula was in revolt, and the counter-revolution was not impossible
after all. He reflected with terror on the sarcasms which he had flung on
young Pompey. He knew him to be a fool and a savage. "Hang me," he said,
"if I do not prefer an old and kind master to trying experiments with a
new and cruel one. The laugh will be on the other side then." [4]

Far had Cicero fallen from his dream of being the greatest man in Rome!
Condemned to immortality by his genius, yet condemned also to survive in
the portrait of himself which he has so unconsciously and so innocently
drawn.

The accounts from Spain were indeed most serious. It is the misfortune of
men of superior military ability that their subordinates are generally
failures when trusted with independent commands. Accustomed to obey
implicitly the instructions of their chief, they have done what they have
been told to do, and their virtue has been in never thinking for
themselves. They succeed, and they forget why they succeed, and in part
attribute their fortune to their own skill. With Alexander's generals,
with Caesar's, with Cromwell's, even with some of Napoleon's, the story
has been the same. They have been self-confident, yet when thrown upon
their own resources they have driven back upon a judgment which has been
inadequately trained. The mind which guided them is absent. The instrument
is called on to become self-acting, and necessarily acts unwisely.
Caesar's lieutenants while under his own eye had executed his orders with
the precision of a machine. When left to their own responsibility they
were invariably found wanting. Among all his officers there was not a man
of real eminence. Labienus, the ablest of them, had but to desert Caesar,
to commit blunder upon blunder, and to ruin the cause to which he attached
himself. Antony, Lepidus, Trebonius, Calvinus, Cassius Longinus, Quintus
Cicero, Sabinus, Decimus Brutus, Vatinius, were trusted with independent
authority, only to show themselves unfit to use it. Cicero had guessed
shrewdly that Caesar's greatest difficulties would begin with his victory.
He had not a man who was able to govern under him away from his immediate
eye.

Cassius Longinus, Trebonius, and Marcus Lepidus had been sent to Spain
after the battle of Pharsalia. They had quarrelled among themselves. They
had driven the legions into mutiny. The authority of Rome had broken down
as entirely as when Sertorius was defying the Senate; and Spain had become
the receptacle of all the active disaffection which remained in the
Empire. Thither had drifted the wreck of Scipio's African army. Thither
had gathered the outlaws, pirates, and banditti of Italy and the Islands.
Thither too had come flights of Numidians and Moors in hopes of plunder;
and Pompey's sons and Labienus had collected an army as numerous as that
which had been defeated at Thapsus, and composed of materials far more
dangerous and desperate. There were thirteen legions of them in all,
regularly formed, with eagles and standards; two which had deserted from
Trebonius; one made out of Roman Spanish settlers, or old soldiers of
Pompey's who had been dismissed at Lerida; four out of the remnants of the
campaign in Africa; the rest a miscellaneous combination of the mutinous
legions of Longinus and outlawed adventurers who knew that there was no
forgiveness for them, and were ready to fight while they could stand. It
was the last cast of the dice for the old party of the aristocracy.
Appearances were thrown off. There were no more Catos, no more phantom
Senates to lend to rebellion the pretended dignity of a national cause.
The true barbarian was there in his natural colors.

Very reluctantly Caesar found that he must himself grapple with this last
convulsion. The sanguinary obstinacy which no longer proposed any object
to itself save defiance and revenge, was converting a war which at first
wore an aspect of a legitimate constitutional struggle, into a conflict
with brigands. Clemency had ceased to be possible, and Caesar would have
gladly left to others the execution in person of the sharp surgery which
was now necessary. He was growing old: fifty-five this summer. His health
was giving way. For fourteen years he had known no rest. That he could
have endured so long such a strain on mind and body was due only to his
extraordinary abstinence, to the simplicity of his habits, and the
calmness of temperament which in the most anxious moments refused to be
agitated. But the work was telling at last on his constitution, and he
departed on his last campaign with confessed unwillingness. The future was
clouded with uncertainty. A few more years of life might enable him to
introduce into the shattered frame of the Commonwealth some durable
elements. His death in the existing confusion might be as fatal as
Alexander's. That some one person not liable to removal under the annual
wave of electoral agitation must preside over the army and the
administration, had been evident in lucid moments even to Cicero. To leave
the prize to be contended for among the military chiefs was to bequeath a
legacy of civil wars and probable disruption; to compound with the
embittered remnants of the aristocracy who were still in the field would
intensify the danger; yet time and peace alone could give opportunity for
the conditions of a permanent settlement to shape themselves. The name of
Caesar had become identified with the stability of the Empire. He no doubt
foresaw that the only possible chief would be found in his own family.
Being himself childless, he had adopted his sister's grandson, Octavius,
afterward Augustus, a fatherless boy of seventeen; and had trained him
under his own eye. He had discerned qualities doubtless in his nephew
which, if his own life was extended for a few years longer, might enable
the boy to become the representative of his house and perhaps the heir of
his power. In the unrecorded intercourse between the uncle and his niece's
child lies the explanation of the rapidity with which the untried Octavius
seized the reins when all was again chaos, and directed the Commonwealth
upon the lines which it was to follow during the remaining centuries of
Roman power.

Octavius accompanied Caesar into Spain. They travelled in a carriage,
having as a third with them the general whom Caesar most trusted and
liked, and whom he had named in his will as one of Octavius's guardians,
Decimus Brutus--the same officer who had commanded his fleet for him at
Quiberon and at Marseilles, and had now been selected as the future
governor of Cisalpine Gaul. Once more it was midwinter when they left
Rome. They travelled swiftly; and Caesar, as usual, himself brought the
news that he was coming. But the winter season did not bring to him its
usual advantages, for the whole Peninsula had revolted, and Pompey and
Labienus were able to shelter their troops in the towns, while Caesar was
obliged to keep the field. Attempts here and there to capture detached
positions led to no results. On both sides now the war was carried on upon
the principles which the Senate had adopted from the first. Prisoners from
the revolted legions were instantly executed, and Cnaeus Pompey murdered
the provincials whom he suspected of an inclination for Caesar. Attagona
was at last taken. Caesar moved on Cordova; and Pompey, fearing that the
important cities might seek their own security by coming separately to
terms, found it necessary to risk a battle.

[Sidenote: March 17, B.C. 45.]
[Sidenote: B.C. 45.]
The scene of the conflict which ended the civil war was the plain of
Munda. The day was the 17th of March, B.C. 45. Spanish tradition places
Munda on the Mediterranean, near Gibraltar. The real Munda was on the
Guadalquiver, so near to Cordova that the remains of the beaten army found
shelter within its walls after the battle. Caesar had been so invariably
victorious in his engagements in the open field that the result might have
been thought a foregone conclusion. Legendary history reported in the next
generation that the elements had been pregnant with auguries. Images had
sweated; the sky had blazed with meteors; celestial armies, the spirits of
the past and future, had battled among the constellations. The signs had
been unfavorable to the Pompeians; the eagles of their legions had dropped
the golden thunderbolts from their talons, spread their wings, and had
flown away to Caesar. In reality, the eagles had remained in their places
till the standards fell from the hands of their dead defenders; and the
battle was one of the most desperate in which Caesar had ever been
engaged. The numbers were nearly equal--the material on both sides equally
good. Pompey's army was composed of revolted Roman soldiers. In arms, in
discipline, in stubborn fierceness, there was no difference. The Pompeians
had the advantage of situation, the village of Munda, with the hill on
which it stood, being in the centre of their lines. The Moorish and
Spanish auxiliaries, of whom there were large bodies on either side, stood
apart when the legions closed; they having no further interest in the
matter than in siding with the conqueror, when fortune had decided who the
conqueror was to be. There were no manoeuvres; no scientific evolutions.
The Pompeians knew that there was no hope for them if they were defeated.
Caesar's men, weary and savage at the protraction of the war, were
determined to make a last end of it; and the two armies fought hand to
hand with their short swords, with set teeth and pressed lips, opened only
with a sharp cry as an enemy fell dead. So equal was the struggle, so
doubtful at one moment the issue of it, that Caesar himself sprang from
his horse, seized a standard, and rallied a wavering legion. It seemed as
if the men meant all to stand and kill or be killed as long as daylight
lasted. The ill fate of Labienus decided the victory. He had seen, as he
supposed, some movement which alarmed him among Caesar's Moorish
auxiliaries, and had galloped conspicuously across the field to lead a
division to check them. A shout rose, "He flies--he flies!" A panic ran
along the Pompeian lines. They gave way, and Caesar's legions forced a
road between their ranks. One wing broke off and made for Cordova; the
rest plunged wildly within the ditch and walls of Munda, the avenging
sword smiting behind into the huddled mass of fugitives. Scarcely a
prisoner was taken. Thirty thousand fell on the field, among them three
thousand Roman knights, the last remains of the haughty youths who had
threatened Caesar with their swords in the senate-house, and had hacked
Clodius's mob in the Forum. Among them was slain Labienus--his desertion
of his general, his insults and his cruelties to his comrades, expiated at
last in his own blood. Attius Varus was killed also, who had been with
Juba when he destroyed Curio. The tragedy was being knitted up in the
deaths of the last actors in it. The eagles of the thirteen legions were
all taken. The two Pompeys escaped on their horses, Sextus disappearing in
the mountains of Grenada or the Sierra Morena; Cnaeus flying for
Gibraltar, where he hoped to find a friendly squadron.

Munda was at once blockaded, the enclosing wall--savage evidence of the
temper of the conquerors--being built of dead bodies pinned together with
lances, and on the top of it a fringe of heads on swords' points with the
faces turned toward the town. A sally was attempted at midnight, and
failed. The desperate wretches then fought among themselves, till at
length the place was surrendered, and fourteen thousand of those who still
survived were taken, and spared. Their comrades, who had made their way
into Cordova, were less fortunate. When the result of the battle was
known, the leading citizen, who had headed the revolt against Caesar,
gathered all that belonged to him into a heap, poured turpentine over it,
and, after a last feast with his family, burnt himself, his house, his
children, and servants. In the midst of the tumult the walls were stormed.
Cordova was given up to plunder and massacre, and twenty-two thousand
miserable people--most of them, it may be hoped, the fugitives from
Munda--were killed. The example sufficed. Every town opened its gates, and
Spain was once more submissive. Sextus Pompey successfully concealed
himself. Cnaeus reached Gibraltar, but to find that most of the ships
which he looked for had been taken by Caesar's fleet. He tried to cross to
the African coast, but was driven back by bad weather, and search parties
were instantly on his track. He had been wounded; he had sprained his
ankle in his flight. Strength and hope were gone. He was carried on a
litter to a cave on a mountain side, where his pursuers found him, cut off
his head, and spared Cicero from further anxiety.

Thus bloodily ended the Civil War, which the Senate of Rome had undertaken
against Caesar, to escape the reforms which were threatened by his second
consulship. They had involuntarily rendered their country the best service
which they were capable of conferring upon it, for the attempts which
Caesar would have made to amend a system too decayed to benefit by the
process had been rendered forever impossible by their persistence. The
free constitution of the Republic had issued at last in elections which
were a mockery of representation, in courts of law which were an insult to
justice, and in the conversion of the Provinces of the Empire into the
feeding-grounds of a gluttonous aristocracy. In the army alone the Roman
character and the Roman honor survived. In the Imperator, therefore, as
chief of the army, the care of the Provinces, the direction of public
policy, the sovereign authority in the last appeal, could alone
thenceforward reside. The Senate might remain as a Council of State; the
magistrates might bear their old names, and administer their old
functions. But the authority of the executive government lay in the
loyalty, the morality, and the patriotism of the legions to whom the power
had been transferred. Fortunately for Rome, the change came before decay
had eaten into the bone, and the genius of the Empire had still a refuge
from platform oratory and senatorial wrangling in the hearts of her
soldiers.

Caesar did not immediately return to Italy. Affairs in Rome were no longer
pressing, and, after the carelessness and blunders of his lieutenants, the
administration of the Peninsula required his personal inspection. From
open revolts in any part of the Roman dominions he had nothing more to
fear. The last card had been played, and the game of open resistance was
lost beyond recovery. There might be dangers of another kind: dangers from
ambitious generals, who might hope to take Caesar's place on his death; or
dangers from constitutional philosophers, like Cicero, who had thought
from the first that the Civil War had been a mistake, "that Caesar was but
mortal, and that there were many ways in which a man might die." A
reflection so frankly expressed, by so respectable a person, must have
occurred to many others as well as to Cicero; Caesar could not but have
foreseen in what resources disappointed fanaticism or baffled selfishness
might seek refuge. But of such possibilities he was prepared to take his
chance; he did not fly from them, he did not seek them; he took his work
as he found it, and remained in Spain through the summer, imposing fines
and allotting rewards, readjusting the taxation, and extending the
political privileges of the Roman colonies. It was not till late in the
autumn that he again turned his face toward Rome.


[1] In connection with this subject it is worth while to mention another
    change in the division of time, not introduced by Caesar, but which
    came into general use about a century after. The week of seven days
    was unknown to the Greeks and to the Romans of the Commonwealth, the
    days of the month being counted by the phases of the moon. The
    seven-days division was supposed by the Romans to be Egyptian. We know
    it to have been Jewish, and it was probably introduced to the general
    world on the first spread of Christianity. It was universally adopted
    at any rate after Christianity had been planted in different parts of
    the Empire, but while the Government and the mass of the people were
    still unconverted to the new religion. The week was accepted for its
    convenience; but while accepted it was paganized; and the seven days
    were allotted to the five planets and the sun and moon in the order
    which still survives among the Latin nations, and here in England with
    a further introduction of Scandinavian mythology. The principle of the
    distribution was what is popularly called "the music of the spheres,"
    and turns on a law of Greek music, which is called by Don Cassius the
    [Greek: armonia dia teddaron]. Assuming the earth to be the centre of
    the universe, the celestial bodies which have a proper movement of
    their own among the stars were arranged in the order of their apparent
    periods of revolution--Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury,
    the Moon. The Jewish Jehovah was identified by the Graeco-Romans with
    Saturn, the oldest of the heathen personal gods. The Sabbath was the
    day supposed to be specially devoted to him. The first day of the week
    was, therefore, given to Saturn. Passing over Jupiter and Mars,
    according to the laws of the [Greek: armonia], the next day was given
    to the Sun; again passing over two, the next to the Moon, and so on,
    going round again to the rest, till the still existing order came out.
    Dies Saturni, dies Solis, dies Lunae, dies Martis, dies Mercurri,
    dies Jovis, and dies Veneris. See Dion Cassius, _Historia
    Romana_, lib. xxxvii. c. 18. Dion Cassius gives a second account of
    the distribution, depending on the twenty-four hours of the day. But
    the twenty-four hours being a division purely artificial, this
    explanation is of less interest.

[2] _To Atticus_, x. 12.

[3] "Cum vivere ipsum turpe sit nobis."--_To Atticus_, xiii. 28.

[4] "Peream nisi sollicitus sum, ac malo veterem et clementem dominum
    habere, quam novum et crudelem experiri. Scis, Cnaeus quam sit fatuus.
    Scis, quomodo crudelitatem virtutem putet. Scis, quam se semper a
    nobis derisum putet. Vereor, ne nos rustice gladio velit
    [Greek: antimuktaerisai]"--_To Caius Cassius, Ad Fam_. xv. 19.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Caesar came back to Rome to resume the suspended work of practical reform.
His first care was to remove the fears which the final spasm of rebellion
had again provoked. He had already granted an amnesty. But the optimates
were conscious that they had desired and hoped that the Pompeys might be
victorious in Spain. Caesar invited the surviving leaders of the party to
sue for pardon on not unbecoming conditions. Hitherto they had kept no
faith with him, and on the first show of opportunity had relapsed into
defiance. His forbearance had been attributed to want of power rather than
of will to punish; when they saw him again triumphant, they assumed that
the representative of the Marian principles would show at last the colors
of his uncle, and that Rome would again run with blood. He knew them all.
He knew that they hated him, and would continue to hate him; but he
supposed that they had recognized the hopelessness and uselessness of
farther conspiracy. By destroying him they would fall only under the rod
of less scrupulous conquerors; and therefore he was content that they
should ask to be forgiven. To show further that the past was really to be
forgotten, he drew no distinction between his enemies and his friends, and
he recommended impartially for office those whose rank or services to the
State entitled them to look for promotion. Thus he pardoned and advanced
Caius Cassius, who would have killed him in Cilicia.[1] But Cassius had
saved Syria from being overrun by the Parthians after the death of
Crassus; and the service to the State outweighed the injury to himself. So
he pardoned and advanced Marcus Brutus, his friend Servilia's son, who had
fought against him at Pharsalia, and had been saved from death there by
his special orders. So he pardoned and protected Cicero; so Marcus
Marcellus, who, as consul, had moved that he should be recalled from his
government, and had flogged the citizen of Como, in scorn of the
privileges which Caesar had granted to the colony. So he pardoned also
Quintus Ligarius,[2] who had betrayed his confidence in Africa; so a
hundred others, who now submitted, accepted his favors, and bound
themselves to plot against him no more. To the widows and children of
those who had fallen in the war he restored the estates and honors of
their families. Finally, as some were still sullen, and refused to sue for
a forgiveness which might imply an acknowledgment of guilt, he renewed the
general amnesty of the previous year; and, as a last evidence that his
victory was not the triumph of democracy, but the consolidation of a
united Empire, he restored the statues of Sylla and Pompey, which had been
thrown down in the revolution, and again dedicated them with a public
ceremonial.

Having thus proved that, so far as he was concerned, he nourished no
resentment against the persons of the optimates, or against their
principles, so far as they were consistent with the future welfare of the
Roman State, Caesar set himself again to the reorganization of the
administration. Unfortunately, each step that he took was a fresh crime in
the eyes of men whose pleasant monopoly of power he had overthrown. But
this was a necessity of the revolution. They had fought for their
supremacy, and had lost the day.

He increased the number of the Senate to nine hundred, filling its ranks
from eminent provincials; introducing even barbarian Gauls, and, still
worse, libertini, the sons of liberated slaves, who had risen to
distinction by their own merit. The new members came in slowly, and it is
needless to say were unwillingly received; a private handbill was sent
round, recommending the coldest of greetings to them.[3]

The inferior magistrates were now responsible to himself as Dictator. He
added to their numbers also, and to check the mischiefs of the annual
elections, he ordered that they should be chosen for three years. He cut
short the corn grants, which nursed the city mob in idleness; and from
among the impoverished citizens he furnished out masses of colonists to
repair the decay of ancient cities. Corinth rose from its ashes under
Caesar's care. Eighty thousand Italians were settled down on the site of
Carthage. As inspector of morals, Caesar inherited in an invigorated form
the power of the censors. Senators and officials who had discredited
themselves by dishonesty were ruthlessly degraded. His own private habits
and the habits of his household were models of frugality. He made an
effort, in which Augustus afterward imitated him, to check the luxury
which was eating into the Roman character. He forbade the idle young
patricians to be carried about by slaves in litters. The markets of the
world had been ransacked to provide dainties for these gentlemen. He
appointed inspectors to survey the dealers' stalls, and occasionally
prohibited dishes were carried off from the dinner table under the eyes of
the disappointed guests,[4] Enemies enough Caesar made by these
measures; but it could not be said of him that he allowed indulgences to
himself which he interdicted to others. His domestic economy was strict
and simple, the accounts being kept to a sesterce. His frugality was
hospitable. He had two tables always, one for his civilian friends,
another for his officers, who dined in uniform. The food was plain, but
the best of its kind; and he was not to be played with in such matters. An
unlucky baker who supplied his guests with bread of worse quality than he
furnished for himself was put in chains. Against moral offences he was
still more severe. He, the supposed example of licentiousness with women,
executed his favorite freedman for adultery with a Roman lady. A senator
had married a woman two days after her divorce from her first husband;
Caesar pronounced the marriage void.

[Sidenote: B.C. 45-44.]
Law reforms went on. Caesar appointed a commission to examine the huge
mass of precedents, reduce them to principles, and form a Digest. He
called in Marcus Varro's help to form libraries in the great towns. He
encouraged physicians and men of science to settle in Rome, by offering
them the freedom of the city. To maintain the free population of Italy, he
required the planters and farmers to employ a fixed proportion of free
laborers on their estates. He put an end to the pleasant tours of senators
at the expense of the provinces; their proper place was Italy, and he
allowed them to go abroad only when they were in office or in the service
of the governors. He formed large engineering plans, a plan to drain the
Pontine marches and the Fucine lake, a plan to form a new channel for the
Tiber, another to improve the roads, another to cut the Isthmus of
Corinth. These were his employments during the few months of life which
were left to him after the close of the war. His health was growing
visibly weaker, but his superhuman energy remained unimpaired. He was even
meditating and was making preparation for a last campaign. The authority
of Rome on the eastern frontier had not recovered from the effects of the
destruction of the army of Crassus. The Parthians were insolent and
aggressive. Caesar had determined to go in person to bring them to their
senses as soon as he could leave Rome. Partly, it was said that he felt
his life would be safer with the troops; partly, he desired to leave the
administration free from his overpowering presence, that it might learn to
go alone; partly and chiefly, he wished to spend such time as might remain
to him where he could do most service to his country. But he was growing
weary of the thankless burden. He was heard often to say that he had lived
long enough. Men of high nature do not find the task of governing their
fellow-creatures particularly delightful.

The Senate meanwhile was occupied in showing the sincerity of their
conversion by inventing honors for their new master, and smothering him
with distinctions since they had failed to defeat him in the field. Few
recruits had yet joined them, and they were still substantially the old
body. They voted Caesar the name of Liberator. They struck medals for him,
in which he was described as Pater Patriae, an epithet which Cicero had
once with quickened pulse heard given to himself by Pompey. "Imperator"
had been a title conferred hitherto by soldiers in the field on a
successful general. It was now granted to Caesar in a special sense, and
was made hereditary in his family, with the command-in-chief of the army
for his life. The Senate gave him also the charge of the treasury. They
made him consul for ten years. Statues were to be erected to him in the
temples, on the Rostra, and in the Capitol, where he was to stand as an
eighth among the seven Kings of Rome. In the excess of their adoration,
they desired even to place his image in the Temple of Quirinus himself,
with an inscription to him as [Greek: Theos animaetos], the invincible
god. Golden chairs, gilt chariots, triumphal robes were piled one upon
another with laurelled fasces and laurelled wreaths. His birthday was made
a perpetual holiday, and the month Quinctilis[5] was renamed, in honor of
him, July. A temple to Concord was to be erected in commemoration of his
clemency. His person was declared sacred, and to injure him by word or
deed was to be counted sacrilege. The Fortune of Caesar was introduced
into the constitutional oath, and the Senate took a solemn pledge to
maintain his acts inviolate. Finally, they arrived at a conclusion that he
was not a man at all; no longer Caius Julius, but Divus Julius, a god or
the son of god. A temple was to be built to Caesar as another Quirinus,
and Antony was to be his priest.

Caesar knew the meaning of all this. He must accept their flattery and
become ridiculous, or he must appear to treat with contumely the Senate
which offered it. The sinister purpose started occasionally into sight.
One obsequious senator proposed that every woman in Rome should be at his
disposition, and filthy libels against him were set floating under the
surface. The object, he perfectly understood, "was to draw him into a
position more and more invidious, that he might the sooner perish." [6]
The praise and the slander of such men were alike indifferent to him. So
far as he was concerned, they might call him what they pleased; god in
public, and devil in their epigrams, if it so seemed good to them. It was
difficult for him to know precisely how to act, but he declined his divine
honors; and he declined the ten years' consulship. Though he was sole
consul for the year, he took a colleague, and when his colleague died on
the last day of office, he named another, that the customary forms might
be observed. Let him do what he would, malice still misconstrued him.
Cicero, the most prominent now of his senatorial flatterers, was the
sharpest with his satire behind the scenes. "Caesar," he said, "had given
so active a consul that there was no sleeping under him." [7]

Caesar was more and more weary of it. He knew that the Senate hated him;
he knew that they would kill him, if they could. All these men whose lips
were running over with adulation, were longing to drive their daggers into
him. He was willing to live, if they would let him live; but, for himself,
he had ceased to care about it. He disdained to take precautions against
assassination. On his first return from Spain, he had been attended by a
guard; but he dismissed it in spite of the remonstrances of his friends,
and went daily into the senate-house alone and unarmed. He spoke often of
his danger with entire openness; but he seemed to think that he had some
security in the certainty that, if he was murdered, the Civil War would
break out again, as if personal hatred was ever checked by fear of
consequences. It was something to feel that he had not lived in vain. The
Gauls were settling into peaceful habits. The soil of Gaul was now as well
cultivated as Italy. Barges loaded with merchandise were passing freely
along the Rhone and the Saone, the Loire, the Moselle, and the Rhine.
[8] The best of the chiefs were made senators of Rome, and the people
were happy and contented. What he had done for Gaul he might, if he lived,
do for Spain, and Africa, and the East. But it was the concern of others
more than of himself. "Better," he said, "to die at once than live in
perpetual dread of treason."

[Sidenote: B.C. 44.]
But Caesar was aware that conspiracies were being formed against him; and
that he spoke freely of his danger, appears from a speech delivered in the
middle of the winter by Cicero in Caesar's presence. It has been seen that
Cicero had lately spoken of Caesar's continuance in life as a disgrace to
the State. It has been seen also that he had long thought of assassination
as the readiest means of ending it. He asserted afterward that he had not
been consulted when the murder was actually accomplished; but the
perpetrators were assured of his approbation, and when Caesar was killed
he deliberately claimed for himself a share of the guilt, if guilt there
could be in what he regarded as the most glorious achievement in human
history,[9] It maybe assumed, therefore, that Cicero's views upon the
subject had remained unchanged since the beginning of the Civil War, and
that his sentiments were no secret among his intimate friends.

Cicero is the second great figure in the history of the time. He has
obtained the immortality which he so much desired, and we are, therefore,
entitled and obliged to scrutinize his conduct with a niceness which would
be ungracious and unnecessary in the case of a less distinguished man.
After Pharsalia he had concluded that the continuance of the war would be
unjustifiable. He had put himself in communication with Antony and
Caesar's friend and secretary Oppius, and at their advice he went from
Greece to Brindisi, to remain there till Caesar's pleasure should be
known. He was very miserable. He had joined Pompey with confessed
reluctance, and family quarrels had followed on Pompey's defeat. His
brother Quintus, whom he had drawn away from Caesar, regretted having
taken his advice. His sons and nephews were equally querulous and
dissatisfied; and for himself, he dared not appear in the streets of
Brindisi, lest Caesar's soldiers should insult or injure him. Antony,
however, encouraged him to hope. He assured him that Caesar was well
disposed to him, and would not only pardon him, but would show him every
possible favor,[10] and with these expectations he contrived for a while
to comfort himself. He had regarded the struggle as over, and Caesar's
side as completely victorious. But gradually the scene seemed to change.
Caesar was long in returning. The optimates rallied in Africa, and there
was again a chance that they might win after all. His first thought was
always for himself. If the constitution survived under Caesar, as he was
inclined to think that in some shape it would, he had expected that a
place would be found in it for him.[11] But how if Caesar himself should
not survive? How if he should be killed in Alexandria? How if he should be
defeated by Metellus Scipio? He described himself as excruciated with
anxiety.[12] Through the year which followed he wavered from day to day
as the prospect varied, now cursing his folly for having followed the
Senate to Greece, now for having deserted them, blaming himself at one
time for his indecision, at another for having committed himself to either
side.[13]

Gradually his alarms subsided. The Senate's party was finally overthrown.
Caesar wrote to him affectionately, and allowed him to retain his title as
Imperator. When it appeared that he had nothing personally to fear, he
recovered his spirits, and he recovered along with them a hope that the
constitution might be restored, after all, by other means than war.
"Caesar could not live forever, and there were many ways in which a man
might die."

Caesar had dined with him in the country, on his way home from Spain. He
had been as kind as Cicero could wish, but had avoided politics. When
Caesar went on to Rome, Cicero followed him, resumed his place in the
Senate, which was then in the full fervor of its affected adulation, and
took an early opportunity of speaking. Marcus Marcellus had been in exile
since Pharsalia. The Senate had interceded for his pardon, and Caesar had
granted it, and granted it with a completeness which exceeded expectation.
Cicero rose to thank him in his presence, in terms which most certainly
did not express his real feelings, whatever may have been the purpose
which they concealed.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He had long been silent," he said, "not from fear, but from grief and
diffidence. The time for silence was past. Thenceforward he intended to
speak his thoughts freely in his ancient manner. Such kindness, such
unheard-of generosity, such moderation in power, such incredible and
almost godlike wisdom, he felt himself unable to pass over without giving
expression to his emotions." [14] No flow of genius, no faculty of speech
or writing, could adequately describe Caesar's actions, yet on that day he
had achieved a yet greater glory. Often had Cicero thought, and often had
said to others, that no king or general had ever performed such exploits
as Caesar. In war, however, officers, soldiers, allies, circumstances,
fortune, claimed a share in the result; and there were victories greater
than could be won on the battlefield, where the honor was undivided.

"To have conquered yourself," he said, addressing Caesar directly, "to
have restrained your resentment, not only to have restored a distinguished
opponent to his civil rights, but to have given him more than he had lost,
is a deed which raises you above humanity, and makes you most like to God.
Your wars will be spoken of to the end of time in all lands and tongues;
but in tales of battles we are deafened by the shoutings and the blare of
trumpets. Justice, mercy, moderation, wisdom, we admire even in fiction,
or in persons whom we have never seen; how much more must we admire them
in you, who are present here before us, and in whose face we read a
purpose to restore us to such remnants of our liberty as have survived the
war! How can we praise, how can we love you sufficiently? By the gods, the
very walls of this house are eloquent with gratitude.... No conqueror in a
civil war was ever so mild as you have been. To-day you have surpassed
yourself. You have overcome victory in giving back the spoils to the
conquered. By the laws of war we were under your feet, to be destroyed, if
you so willed. We live by your goodness.... Observe, conscript fathers,
how comprehensive is Caesar's sentence. We were in arms against him, how
impelled I know not. He cannot acquit us of mistake, but he holds us
innocent of crime, for he has given us back Marcellus at your entreaty.
Me, of his own free will, he has restored to myself and to my country. He
has brought back the most illustrious survivors of the war. You see them
gathered here in this full assembly. He has not regarded them as enemies.
He has concluded that you entered into the conflict with him rather in
ignorance and unfounded fear than from any motives of ambition or
hostility.

"For me, I was always for peace. Caesar was for peace, so was Marcellus.
There were violent men among you, whose success Marcellus dreaded. Each
party had a cause. I will not compare them. I will compare rather the
victory of the one with the possible victory of the other. Caesar's wars
ended with the last battle. The sword is now sheathed. Those whom we have
lost fell in the fury of the fight, not one by the resentment of the
conqueror. Caesar, if he could, would bring back to life many who lie
dead. For the others, we all feared what they might do if the day had been
theirs. They not only threatened those who were in arms against them, but
those who sate quietly at home."

       *       *       *       *       *

Cicero then said that he had heard a fear of assassination expressed by
Caesar. By whom, he asked, could such an attempt be made? Not by those
whom he had forgiven, for none were more attached to him. Not by his
comrades, for they could not be so mad as to conspire against the general
to whom they owed all that they possessed. Not by his enemies, for he had
no enemies. Those who had been his enemies were either dead through their
own obstinacy, or were alive through his generosity. It was possible,
however, he admitted, that there might be some such danger.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Be you, therefore," he said, again speaking to Caesar,--"be you watchful,
and let us be diligent. Who is so careless of his own and the common
welfare as to be ignorant that on your preservation his own depends, and
that all our lives are bound up in yours? I, as in duty bound, think of
you by night and day; I ponder over the accidents of humanity, the
uncertainty of health, the frailty of our common nature, and I grieve to
think that the Commonwealth which ought to be immortal should hang on the
breath of a single man. If to these perils be added a nefarious
conspiracy, to what god can we turn for help? War has laid prostrate our
institutions; you alone can restore them. The courts of justice need to be
reconstituted, credit to be recovered, license to be repressed, the
thinned ranks of the citizens to be repaired. The bonds of society are
relaxed. In such a war, and with such a temper in men's hearts, the State
must have lost many of its greatest ornaments, be the event what it would.
These wounds need healing, and you alone can heal them. With sorrow I have
heard you say that you have lived long enough. For nature it may be that
you have, and perhaps for glory. But for your country you have not. Put
away, I beseech you, this contempt of death. Be not wise at our expense.
You repeat often, I am told, that you do not wish for longer life. I
believe you mean it; nor should I blame you, if you had to think only of
yourself. But by your actions you have involved the welfare of each
citizen and of the whole Commonwealth in your own. Your work is
unfinished: the foundations are hardly laid, and is it for you to be
measuring calmly your term of days by your own desires?... If, Caesar, the
result of your immortal deeds is to be no more than this, that, after
defeating your enemies, you are to leave the State in the condition in
which it now stands, your splendid qualities will be more admired than
honored. It remains for you to rebuild the constitution. Live till this is
done. Live till you see your country tranquil, and at peace. Then, when
your last debt is paid, when you have filled the measure of your existence
to overflowing, then say, if you will, that you have had enough of life.
Your life is not the life which is bounded by the union of your soul and
body, your life is that which shall continue fresh in the memory of ages
to come, which posterity will cherish, and eternity itself keep guard
over. Much has been done which men will admire: much remains to be done,
which they can praise. They will read with wonder of empires and
provinces, of the Rhine, the ocean, and the Nile, of battles without
number, of amazing victories, of countless monuments and triumphs; but
unless this Commonwealth be wisely re-established in institutions by you
bestowed upon us, your name will travel widely over the world, but will
have no stable habitation; and those who come after us will dispute about
you as we have disputed. Some will extol you to the skies, others will
find something wanting and the most important element of all. Remember the
tribunal before which you will hereafter stand. The ages that are to be
will try you, with minds, it may be, less prejudiced than ours,
uninfluenced either by desire to please you or by envy of your greatness.

"Our dissensions have been crushed by the arms, and extinguished by the
lenity of the conqueror. Let all of us, not the wise only, but every
citizen who has ordinary sense, be guided by a single desire. Salvation
there can be none for us, Caesar, unless you are preserved. Therefore, we
exhort you, we beseech you, to watch over your own safety. You believe
that you are threatened by a secret peril. From my own heart I say, and I
speak for others as well as myself, we will stand as sentries over your
safety, and we will interpose our own bodies between you and any danger
which may menace you." [15]

       *       *       *       *       *

Such, in compressed form, for necessary brevity, but deserving to be
studied in its own brilliant language, was the speech delivered by Cicero,
in the Senate in Caesar's presence, within a few weeks of his murder. The
authenticity of it has been questioned, but without result beyond creating
a doubt whether it was edited and corrected, according to his usual habit,
by Cicero himself. The external evidence of genuineness is as good as for
any of his other orations, and the Senate possessed no other speaker known
to us, to whom, with any probability, so splendid an illustration of Roman
eloquence could be assigned.

Now, therefore, let us turn to the second Philippic delivered in the
following summer when the deed had been accomplished which Cicero
professed to hold in so much abhorrence. Then, fiercely challenging for
himself a share in the glory of tyrannicide, he exclaimed:

       *       *       *       *       *

"What difference is there between advice beforehand and approbation
afterward? What does it matter whether I wished it to be done, or rejoiced
that it was done? Is there a man, save Antony and those who were glad to
have Caesar reign over us, that did not wish him to be killed, or that
disapproved when he was killed? All were in fault, for all the _Boni_
joined in killing him, so far as lay in them. Some were not consulted,
some wanted courage, some opportunity. All were willing," [16]

Expressions so vehemently opposite compel us to compare them. Was it that
Cicero was so carried away by the stream of his oratory, that he spoke
like an actor, under artificial emotion which the occasion called for? Was
it that he was deliberately trying to persuade Caesar that from the Senate
he had nothing to fear, and so to put him off his guard? If, as he
declared, he himself and the _Boni_, who were listening to him,
desired so unanimously to see Caesar killed, how else can his language be
interpreted? Cicero stands before the tribunal of posterity, to which he
was so fond of appealing. In him, too, while "there is much to admire,"
"something may be found wanting."

Meanwhile the Senate went its way, still inventing fresh titles and
conferring fresh powers. Caesar said that these vain distinctions needed
limitation, rather than increase; but the flattery had a purpose in it,
and would not be checked.

One day a deputation waited on him with the proffer of some "new marvel."
[17] He was sitting in front of the Temple of Venus Genetrix, and when
the senators approached he neglected to rise to receive them. Some said
that he was moving, but that Cornelius Balbus pulled him down. Others said
that he was unwell. Pontius Aquila, a tribune, had shortly before refused
to rise to Caesar. The senators thought he meant to read them a lesson in
return. He intended to be king, it seemed; the constitution was gone,
another Tarquin was about to seize the throne of Republican Rome.

Caesar was king in fact, and to recognize facts is more salutary than to
ignore them. An acknowledgment of Caesar as king might have made the
problem of reorganization easier than it proved. The army had thought of
it. He was on the point of starting for Parthia, and a prophecy had said
that the Parthians could only be conquered by a king.--But the Roman
people were sensitive about names. Though their liberties were restricted
for the present, they liked to hope that one day the Forum might recover
its greatness. The Senate, meditating on the insult which they had
received, concluded that Caesar might be tempted, and that if they could
bring him to consent he would lose the people's hearts. They had already
made him Dictator for life; they voted next that he really should be King,
and, not formally perhaps, but tentatively, they offered him the crown. He
was sounded as to whether he would accept it. He understood the snare, and
refused. What was to be done next? He would soon be gone to the East. Rome
and its hollow adulations would lie behind him, and their one opportunity
would be gone also. They employed some one to place a diadem on the head
of his statue which stood upon the Rostra.[18] It was done publicly, in
the midst of a vast crowd, in Caesar's presence. Two eager tribunes tore
the diadem down, and ordered the offender into custody. The treachery of
the Senate was not the only danger. His friends in the army had the same
ambition for him. A few days later, as he was riding through the streets,
he was saluted as King by the mob. Caesar answered calmly that he was not
King but Caesar, and there the matter might have ended; but the tribunes
rushed into the crowd to arrest the leaders; a riot followed, for which
Caesar blamed them; they complained noisily; he brought their conduct
before the Senate, and they were censured and suspended. But suspicion was
doing its work, and honest republican hearts began to heat and kindle.

The kingship assumed a more serious form on the 15th of February at the
Lupercalia--the ancient carnival. Caesar was in his chair, in his consular
purple, wearing a wreath of bay, wrought in gold. The honor of the wreath
was the only distinction which he had accepted from the Senate with
pleasure. He retained a remnant of youthful vanity, and the twisted leaves
concealed his baldness. Antony, his colleague in the consulship,
approached with a tiara, and placed it on Caesar's head, saying, "The
people give you this by my hand." That Antony had no sinister purpose is
obvious. He perhaps spoke for the army;[19] or it may be that Caesar
himself suggested Antony's action, that he might end the agitation of so
dangerous a subject. He answered in a loud voice "that the Romans had no
king but God," and ordered that the tiara should be taken to the Capitol,
and placed on the statue of Jupiter Olympius. The crowd burst into an
enthusiastic cheer; and an inscription on a brass tablet recorded that the
Roman people had offered Caesar the crown by the hands of the consul, and
that Caesar had refused it.

The question of the kingship was over; but a vague alarm had been created,
which answered the purpose of the optimates. Caesar was at their mercy any
day. They had sworn to maintain all his acts. They had sworn, after
Cicero's speech, individually and collectively to defend his life. Caesar,
whether he believed them sincere or not, had taken them at their word, and
came daily to the Senate unarmed and without a guard. He had a protection
in the people. If the optimates killed him without preparation, they knew
that they would be immediately massacred. But an atmosphere of suspicion
and uncertainty had been successfully generated, of which they determined
to take immediate advantage. There were no troops in the city. Lepidus,
Caesar's master of the horse, who had been appointed governor of Gaul, was
outside the gates, with a few cohorts; but Lepidus was a person of feeble
character, and they trusted to be able to deal with him.

Sixty senators, in all, were parties to the immediate conspiracy. Of these
nine-tenths were members of the old faction whom Caesar had pardoned, and
who, of all his acts, resented most that he had been able to pardon them.
They were the men who had stayed at home, like Cicero, from the fields of
Thapsus and Munda, and had pretended penitence and submission that they
might take an easier road to rid themselves of their enemy. Their motives
were the ambition of their order and personal hatred of Caesar; but they
persuaded themselves that they were animated by patriotism, and as, in
their hands, the Republic had been a mockery of liberty, so they aimed at
restoring it by a mock tyrannicide. Their oaths and their professions were
nothing to them. If they were entitled to kill Caesar, they were entitled
equally to deceive him. No stronger evidence is needed of the
demoralization of the Roman Senate than the completeness with which they
were able to disguise from themselves the baseness of their treachery. One
man only they were able to attract into co-operation who had a reputation
for honesty, and could be conceived, without absurdity, to be animated by
a disinterested purpose.

Marcus Brutus was the son of Cato's sister Servilia, the friend, and a
scandal said the mistress, of Caesar. That he was Caesar's son was not too
absurd for the credulity of Roman drawing-rooms. Brutus himself could not
have believed in the existence of such a relation, for he was deeply
attached to his mother; and although, under the influence of his uncle
Cato, he had taken the Senate's side in the war, he had accepted afterward
not pardon only from Caesar, but favors of many kinds, for which he had
professed, and probably felt, some real gratitude. He had married Cato's
daughter Portia, and on Cato's death had published a eulogy upon him.
Caesar left him free to think and write what he pleased. He had made him
praetor; he had nominated him to the governorship of Macedonia. Brutus was
perhaps the only member of the senatorial party in whom Caesar felt
genuine confidence. His known integrity, and Caesar's acknowledged regard
for him, made his accession to the conspiracy an object of particular
importance. The name of Brutus would be a guarantee to the people of
rectitude of intention. Brutus, as the world went, was of more than
average honesty. He had sworn to be faithful to Caesar as the rest had
sworn, and an oath with him was not a thing to be emotionalized away; but
he was a fanatical republican, a man of gloomy habits, given to dreams and
omens, and easily liable to be influenced by appeals to visionary
feelings. Caius Cassius, his brother-in-law, was employed to work upon
him. Cassius, too, was praetor that year, having been also nominated to
office by Caesar. He knew Brutus, he knew where and how to move him. He
reminded him of the great traditions of his name. A Brutus had delivered
Rome from the Tarquins. The blood of a Brutus was consecrated to liberty.
This, too, was mockery; Brutus, who expelled the Tarquins, put his sons to
death, and died childless; Marcus Brutus came of good plebeian family,
with no glories of tyrannicide about them; but an imaginary genealogy
suited well with the spurious heroics which veiled the motives of Caesar's
murderers.

Brutus, once wrought upon, became with Cassius the most ardent in the
cause which assumed the aspect to him of a sacred duty. Behind them were
the crowd of senators of the familiar faction, and others worse than they,
who had not even the excuse of having been partisans of the beaten cause;
men who had fought at Caesar's side till the war was over, and believed,
like Labienus, that to them Caesar owed his fortune, and that he alone
ought not to reap the harvest. One of these was Trebonius, who had
misconducted himself in Spain, and was smarting under the recollection of
his own failures. Trebonius had long before sounded Antony on the
desirableness of removing their chief. Antony, though he remained himself
true, had unfortunately kept his friend's counsel. Trebonius had been
named by Caesar for a future consulship, but a distant reward was too
little for him. Another and a yet baser traitor was Decimus Brutus, whom
Caesar valued and trusted beyond all his officers, whom he had selected as
guardian for Augustus, and had noticed, as was seen afterward, with
special affection in his will. The services of these men were invaluable
to the conspirators on account of their influence with the army. Decimus
Brutus, like Labienus, had enriched himself in Caesar's campaigns, and had
amassed near half a million of English money.[20] It may have been easy
to persuade him and Trebonius that a grateful Republic would consider no
recompense too large to men who would sacrifice their commander to their
country. To Caesar they could be no more than satellites; the first prizes
of the Empire would be offered to the choice of the saviours of the
constitution.

So composed was this memorable band, to whom was to fall the bad
distinction of completing the ruin of the senatorial rule. Caesar would
have spared something of it; enough, perhaps, to have thrown up shoots
again as soon as he had himself passed away in the common course of
nature. By combining in a focus the most hateful characteristics of the
order, by revolting the moral instincts of mankind by ingratitude and
treachery, they stripped their cause by their own hands of the false
glamour which they hoped to throw over it. The profligacy and avarice, the
cynical disregard of obligation, which had marked the Senate's supremacy
for a century, had exhibited abundantly their unfitness for the high
functions which had descended to them; but custom and natural tenderness
for a form of government, the past history of which had been so glorious,
might have continued still to shield them from the penalty of their
iniquities. The murder of Caesar filled the measure of their crimes, and
gave the last and necessary impulse to the closing act of the revolution.

Thus the ides of March drew near. Caesar was to set out in a few days for
Parthia. Decimus Brutus was going, as governor, to the north of Italy,
Lepidus to Gaul, Marcus Brutus to Macedonia, and Trebonius to Asia Minor.
Antony, Caesar's colleague in the consulship, was to remain in Italy.
Dolabella, Cicero's son-in-law, was to be consul with him as soon as
Caesar should have left for the East. The foreign appointments were all
made for five years, and in another week the party would be scattered. The
time for action had come, if action there was to be. Papers were dropped
in Brutus's room, bidding him awake from his sleep. On the statue of
Junius Brutus some hot republican wrote "Would that thou wast alive!" The
assassination in itself was easy, for Caesar would take no precautions. So
portentous an intention could not be kept entirely secret; many friends
warned him to beware; but he disdained too heartily the worst that his
enemies could do to him to vex himself with thinking of them, and he
forbade the subject to be mentioned any more in his presence. Portents,
prophecies, soothsayings, frightful aspects in the sacrifices, natural
growths of alarm and excitement, were equally vain. "Am I to be
frightened," he said, in answer to some report of the haruspices,
"because a sheep is without a heart?"

[Sidenote: March 14, B.C. 44.]
An important meeting of the Senate had been called for the ides (the 15th)
of the month. The Pontifices, it was whispered, intended to bring on again
the question of the kingship before Caesar's departure. The occasion would
be appropriate. The senate-house itself was a convenient scene of
operations. The conspirators met at supper the evening before at Cassius's
house. Cicero, to his regret, was not invited. The plan was simple, and
was rapidly arranged. Caesar would attend unarmed. The senators not in the
secret would be unarmed also. The party who intended to act were to
provide themselves with poniards, which could be easily concealed in their
paper boxes. So far all was simple; but a question rose whether Caesar
only was to be killed, or whether Antony and Lepidus were to be despatched
along with him. They decided that Caesar's death would be sufficient. To
spill blood without necessity would mar, it was thought, the sublimity of
their exploit. Some of them liked Antony. None supposed that either he or
Lepidus would be dangerous when Caesar was gone. In this resolution Cicero
thought that they made a fatal mistake;[21] fine emotions were good in
their place, in the perorations of speeches and such like; Antony, as
Cicero admitted, had been signally kind to him; but the killing Caesar was
a serious business, and his friends should have died along with him. It
was determined otherwise. Antony and Lepidus were not to be touched. For
the rest, the assassins had merely to be in their places in the Senate in
good time. When Caesar entered, Trebonius was to detain Antony in
conversation at the door. The others were to gather about Caesar's chair
on pretence of presenting a petition, and so could make an end. A gang of
gladiators were to be secreted in the adjoining theatre to be ready should
any unforeseen difficulty present itself.

The same evening, the 14th of March, Caesar was at a "Last Supper" at the
house of Lepidus. The conversation turned on death, and on the kind of
death which was most to be desired. Caesar, who was signing papers while
the rest wore talking, looked up and said, "A sudden one." When great men
die, imagination insists that all nature shall have felt the shock.
Strange stories were told in after years of the uneasy labors of the
elements that night.

  A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
  The graves did open, and the sheeted dead
  Did squeak and jibber in the Roman streets.

The armor of Mars, which stood in the hall of the Pontifical Palace,
crashed down upon the pavement. The door of Caesar's room flew open.
Calpurnia dreamt her husband was murdered, and that she saw him ascending
into heaven, and received by the hand of God.[22] In the morning the
sacrifices were again unfavorable. Caesar was restless. Some natural
disorder affected his spirits, and his spirits were reacting on his body.
Contrary to his usual habit, he gave way to depression. He decided, at his
wife's entreaty, that he would not attend the Senate that day.

[Sidenote: March 15, B.C. 44.]
The house was full. The conspirators were in their places with their
daggers ready. Attendants came in to remove Caesar's chair. It was
announced that he was not coming. Delay might be fatal. They conjectured
that he already suspected something. A day's respite, and all might be
discovered. His familiar friend whom he trusted--the coincidence is
striking!--was employed to betray him. Decimus Brutus, whom it was
impossible for him to distrust, went to entreat his attendance, giving
reasons to which he knew that Caesar would listen, unless the plot had
been actually betrayed. It was now eleven in the forenoon. Caesar shook
off his uneasiness, and rose to go. As he crossed the hall, his statue
fell, and shivered on the stones. Some servant, perhaps, had heard
whispers, and wished to warn him. As he still passed on, a stranger thrust
a scroll into his hand, and begged him to read it on the spot. It
contained a list of the conspirators, with a clear account of the plot. He
supposed it to be a petition, and placed it carelessly among his other
papers. The fate of the Empire hung upon a thread, but the thread was not
broken, As Caesar had lived to reconstruct the Roman world, so his death
was necessary to finish the work. He went on to the Curia, and the
senators said to themselves that the augurs had foretold his fate, but he
would not listen; he was doomed for his "contempt of religion." [23]

Antony, who was in attendance, was detained, as had been arranged, by
Trebonius. Caesar entered, and took his seat. His presence awed men, in
spite of themselves, and the conspirators had determined to act at once,
lest they should lose courage to act at all. He was familiar and easy of
access. They gathered round him. He knew them all. There was not one from
whom he had not a right to expect some sort of gratitude, and the movement
suggested no suspicion. One had a story to tell him; another some favor to
ask. Tullius Cimber, whom he had just made governor of Bithynia, then came
close to him, with some request which he was unwilling to grant. Cimber
caught his gown, as if in entreaty, and dragged it from his shoulders.
Cassius,[24] who was standing behind, stabbed him in the throat. He
started up with a cry, and caught Cassius's arm. Another poniard entered
his breast, giving a mortal wound. He looked round, and seeing not one
friendly face, but only a ring of daggers pointing at him, he drew his
gown over his head, gathered the folds about him that he might fall
decently, and sank down without uttering another word,[25] Cicero was
present. The feelings with which he watched the scene are unrecorded, but
may easily be imagined. Waving his dagger, dripping with Caesar's blood,
Brutus shouted to Cicero by name, congratulating him that liberty was
restored.[26] The Senate rose with shrieks and confusion, and rushed
into the Forum. The crowd outside caught the words that Caesar was dead,
and scattered to their houses. Antony, guessing that those who had killed
Caesar would not spare himself, hurried off into concealment. The
murderers, bleeding some of them from wounds which they had given one
another in their eagerness, followed, crying that the tyrant was dead, and
that Rome was free; and the body of the great Caesar was left alone in the
house where a few weeks before Cicero told him that he was so necessary to
his country that every senator would die before harm should reach him!


[1] Apparently when Caesar touched there on his way to Egypt, after
    Pharsalia. Cicero says (_Philippic_ ii. 11): "Quid? C.
    Cassius ... qui etiam sine his clarissimis viris, hanc rem in Cilicia
    ad ostium fluminis Cydni confecisset, si ille ad eam ripam quam
    constituerat, non ad contrariam, navi appulisset."

[2] To be distinguished from Publius Ligarius, who had been put to death
    before Thapsus.

[3] The Gauls were especially obnoxious, and epigrams were circulated to
    insult them:--

      "Gallos Caesar in triumphum ducit, idem in Curiam.
      Galli braccas deposuerunt, latum clavum sumpserunt"

      SUETONIUS, _Vita Jullii Caesaris_, 80.

[4] Suetonius.

[5] The fifth, dating the beginning of the year, in the old style, from
    March.

[6] Dion Cassius.

[7] The second consul who had been put in held office but for a few hours.

[8] Dion Cassius.

[9] See the 2nd _Philippic_, passim. In a letter to Decimus Brutus,
    he says: "Quare hortatione tu quidem non egos, si ne illa quidem in
    re, quae a te gesta est post hominum memoriam maxima, hortatorem
    desiderasti." _Ad Fam_. xi. 5.

[10] _To Atticus_, xi. 5, 6.

[11] _Ad Caelium, Ad Fam_. ii. 16.

[12] _To Atticus_, xi. 7.

[13] See _To Atticus_, xi. 7-9; _To Terentia, Ad Fam_. xiv. 12.

[14] "Tantam enim mansuetudinem, tam inusitatam inauditamque clementiam,
    tantum in summa potestate rerum omnium modum, tam denique incredibilem
    sapientiam ac paene divinam tacitus nullo modo praeterire
    possum."--_Pro Marco Marcello_, 1.

[15] _Pro Marco Marcello_, abridged.

[16] "Non intelligis, si id quod me arguis voluisse interfici Caesarem
    crimen sit, etiam laetatum esse morte Caesaris crimen esse? Quid enim
    interest inter suasorem facti et approbatorem? Aut quid refert utrum
    voluerim fieri an gaudeam factum? Ecquis est igitur te excepto et iis
    qui illum regnare gaudebant, qui illud aut fieri noluerit, aut factum
    improbarit? Omnes enim in culpa. Etenim omnes boni quantum in ipsis
    fuit Caesarem occiderunt. Aliis consilium, aliis animus, aliis occasio
    defuit. Voluntas nemini."--_2nd Philippic_, 12.

[17] Dion Cassius.

[18] So Dion Cassius states, on what authority we know not. Suetonius says
    that as Caesar was returning from the Latin festival some one placed a
    laurel crown on the statue, tied with a white riband.

[19] The fact is certain. Cicero taunted Antony with it in the Senate, in
    the Second Philippic.

[20] "Cum ad rem publicam liberandam accessi, HS. mihi fuit
    quadringenties amplius."--_Decimus Brutus to Cicero,
    Ad Fam_. xi. 10.

[21] "Vellem Idibus Martiis me ad coenam invitasses. Reliquiarum nihil
    fuisset."--_Ad Cassium, Ad Fam_. xii. 4. And again: "Quam vellem
    ad illas pulcherrimas epulas me Idibus Martiis invitasses! Reliquiarum
    nihil haberemus."--_Ad Trebonium, Ad Fam_. x. 28.

[22] Dion Cassius, _C. Julius Caesar_, xliv. 17.

[23] "Spreta religione."--Suetonius.

[24] Not perhaps Caius Cassius, but another. Suetonius says "alter e
    Cassiis."

[25] So says Suetonius, the best extant authority, who refers to the
    famous words addressed to Brutus only as a legend: "Atque ita tribus
    et viginti plagis confossus est, uno modo ad primum ictum gemitu sine
    voce edito. Etsi tradiderunt quidam Marco Bruto irruenti dixisse
    [Greek: kai su ei ekeinon kai su teknon]"--_Julius Caesar_, 82.

[26] "Cruentum alte extollens Marcus Brutus pugionem, Ciceronem
    nominatim exclamavit atque ei recuperatam libertatem est
    gratulatus."--_Philippic ii_. 12.




CHAPTER XXVII.


[Sidenote: March 16, B.C. 44.]
The tyrannicides, as the murderers of Caesar called themselves, had
expected that the Roman mob would be caught by the cry of liberty, and
would hail them as the deliverers of their country. They found that the
people did not respond as they had anticipated. The city was stunned. The
Forum was empty. The gladiators, whom they had secreted in the Temple,
broke out and plundered the unprotected booths. A dead and ominous silence
prevailed everywhere. At length a few citizens collected in knots. Brutus
spoke, and Cassius spoke. They extolled their old constitution. They said
that Caesar had overthrown it; that they had slain him, not from private
hatred or private interest, but to restore the liberties of Rome. The
audience was dead and cold. No answering shouts came back to reassure
them. The citizens could not forget that these men who spoke so fairly had
a few days before fawned on Caesar as the saviour of the Empire, and, as
if human honors were too little, had voted a temple to him as a god. The
fire would not kindle. Lepidus came in with troops, and occupied the
Forum. The conspirators withdrew into the Capitol, where Cicero and others
joined them, and the night was passed in earnest discussion what next was
to be done. They had intended to declare that Caesar had been a tyrant, to
throw his body into the Tiber, and to confiscate his property to the
State. They discovered to their consternation that, if Caesar was a
tyrant, all his acts would be invalidated. The praetors and tribunes held
their offices, the governors their provinces, under Caesar's nomination.
If Caesar's acts were set aside, Decimus Brutus was not governor of North
Italy, nor Marcus Brutus of Macedonia; nor was Dolabella consul, as he had
instantly claimed to be on Caesar's death. Their names, and the names of
many more whom Caesar had promoted, would have to be laid before the
Comitia, and in the doubtful humor of the people they little liked the
risk. That the dilemma should have been totally unforeseen was
characteristic of the men and their capacity.

Nor was this the worst. Lands had been allotted to Caesar's troops. Many
thousands of colonists were waiting to depart for Carthage and Corinth and
other places where settlements had been provided for them. These
arrangements would equally fall through, and it was easy to know what
would follow. Antony and Lepidus, too, had to be reckoned with. Antony, as
the surviving consul, was the supreme lawful authority in the city; and
Lepidus and his soldiers might have a word to say if the body of their
great commander was flung into the river as the corpse of a malefactor.
Interest and fear suggested more moderate counsels. The conspirators
determined that Caesar's appointments must stand; his acts, it seemed,
must stand also; and his remains, therefore, must be treated with respect.
Imagination took another flight. Caesar's death might be regarded as a
sacrifice, an expiatory offering for the sins of the nation; and the
divided parties might embrace in virtue of the atonement. They agreed to
send for Antony, and invite him to assist in saving society; and they
asked Cicero to be their messenger. Cicero, great and many as his faults
might be, was not a fool. He declined to go on so absurd a mission. He
knew Antony too well to dream that he could be imposed on by fantastic
illusions. Antony, he said, would promise anything, but if they trusted
him, they would have reason to repent.[1] Others, however, undertook
the office. Antony agreed to meet them, and the next morning the Senate
was assembled in the Temple of Terra.

Antony presided as consul, and after a few words from him Cicero rose. He
disapproved of the course which his friends were taking; he foresaw what
must come of it; but he had been overruled, and he made the best of what
he could not help. He gave a sketch of Roman political history. He went
back to the secession to Mount Aventine. He spoke of the Gracchi, of
Saturninus and Glaucia, of Marius and Sylla, of Sertorius and Pompey, of
Caesar and the still unforgotten Clodius. He described the fate of Athens
and of other Grecian states into which faction had penetrated. If Rome
continued divided, the conquerors would rule over its ruins; therefore he
appealed to the two factions to forget their rivalries and to return to
peace and concord. But they must decide at once, for the signs were
already visible of a fresh conflict.

"Caesar is slain," he said. "The Capitol is occupied by the optimates, the
Forum by soldiers, and the people are full of terror. Is violence to be
again answered by more violence? These many years we have lived less like
men than like wild beasts in cycles of recurring revenge. Let us forget
the past. Let us draw a veil over all that has been done, not looking too
curiously into the acts of any man. Much may be said to show that Caesar
deserved his death, and much against those who have killed him. But to
raise the question will breed fresh quarrels; and if we are wise we shall
regard the scene which we have witnessed as a convulsion of nature which
is now at an end. Let Caesar's ordinances, let Caesar's appointments be
maintained. None such must be heard of again. But what is done cannot be
undone." [2]

Admirable advice, were it as easy to act on good counsel as to give it.
The murder of such a man as Caesar was not to be so easily smoothed over.
But the delusive vision seemed for a moment to please. The Senate passed
an act of oblivion. The agitation in the army was quieted when the men
heard that their lands were secure. But there were two other questions
which required an answer, and an immediate one. Caesar's body, after
remaining till evening on the floor of the senate-house, had been carried
home in the dusk in a litter by three of his servants, and was now lying
in his palace. If it was not to be thrown into the Tiber, what was to be
done with it? Caesar had left a will, which was safe with his other papers
in the hands of Antony. Was the will to be read and recognized? Though
Cicero had advised in the Senate that the discussion whether Caesar had
deserved death should not be raised, yet it was plain to him and to every
one that, unless Caesar was held guilty of conspiring against the
Constitution, the murder was and would be regarded as a most execrable
crime. He dreaded the effect of a public funeral. He feared that the will
might contain provisions which would rouse the passions of the people.
Though Caesar was not for various reasons to be pronounced a tyrant,
Cicero advised that he should be buried privately, as if his name was
under a cloud, and that his property should be escheated to the nation.
But the humor of conciliation and the theory of "the atoning sacrifice"
had caught the Senate. Caesar had done great things for his country. It
would please the army that he should have an honorable sepulture.

[Sidenote: March, B.C. 44.]
If they had refused, the result would not have been greatly different.
Sooner or later, when the stunning effects of the shock had passed off,
the murder must have appeared to Rome and Italy in its true colors. The
optimates talked of the Constitution. The Constitution in their hands had
been a parody of liberty. Caesar's political life had been spent in
wresting from them the powers which they had abused. Caesar had punished
the oppressors of the provinces. Caesar had forced the nobles to give the
people a share of the public lands. Caesar had opened the doors of
citizenship to the libertini, the distant colonists, and the provincials.
It was for this that the Senate hated him. For this they had fought
against him; for this they murdered him. No Roman had ever served his
country better in peace or war, and thus he had been rewarded.

Such thoughts were already working in tens of thousands of breasts. A
feeling of resentment was fast rising, with as yet no certain purpose
before it. In this mood the funeral could not fail to lead to some fierce
explosion. For this reason Antony had pressed for it, and the Senate had
given their consent.

The body was brought down to the Forum and placed upon the Rostra. The
dress had not been changed; the gown, gashed with daggers and soaked in
blood, was still wrapped about it. The will was read first. It reminded
the Romans that they had been always in Caesar's thoughts, for he had left
each citizen seventy-five drachmas (nearly L3 of English money), and he
had left them his gardens on the Tiber as a perpetual recreation ground, a
possession which Domitius Ahenobarbus had designed for himself before
Pharsalia. He had made Octavius his general heir; among the second heirs,
should Octavius fail, he had named Decimus Brutus, who had betrayed him. A
deep movement of emotion passed through the crowd when, besides the
consideration for themselves, they heard from this record, which could not
lie, a proof of the confidence which had been so abused. Antony, after
waiting for the passion to work, then came forward.

Cicero had good reason for his fear of Antony. He was a loose soldier,
careless in his life, ambitious, extravagant, little more scrupulous
perhaps than any average Roman gentleman. But for Caesar his affection was
genuine. The people were in intense expectation. He produced the body, all
bloody as it had fallen, and he bade a herald first read the votes which
the Senate had freshly passed, heaping those extravagant honors upon
Caesar which he had not desired, and the oath which the senators had each
personally taken to defend him from violence. He then spoke--spoke with
the natural vehemence of a friend, yet saying nothing which was not
literally true. The services of Caesar neither needed nor permitted the
exaggeration of eloquence.

He began with the usual encomiums. He spoke of Caesar's family, his birth,
his early history, his personal characteristics, his thrifty private
habits, his public liberality; he described him as generous to his
friends, forbearing with his enemies, without evil in himself, and
reluctant to believe evil of others.

"Power in most men," he said, "has brought their faults to light. Power in
Caesar brought into prominence his excellences. Prosperity did not make
him insolent for it gave him a sphere which corresponded to his nature.
His first services in Spain a deserved triumph; of his laws I could speak
forever. His campaigns in Gaul are known to you all. That land from which
the Teutons and Cimbri poured over the Alps is now as well ordered as
Italy. Caesar would have added Germany and Britain to your Empire, but his
enemies would not have it so. They regarded the Commonwealth as the
patrimony of themselves. They brought him home. They went on with their
usurpations till you yourselves required his help. He set you free. He set
Spain free. He labored for peace with Pompey, but Pompey preferred to go
into Greece, to bring the powers of the East upon you, and he perished in
his obstinacy.

"Caesar took no honor to himself for this victory. He abhorred the
necessity of it. He took no revenge. He praised those who had been
faithful to Pompey, and he blamed Pharnaces for deserting him. He was
sorry for Pompey's death, and he treated his murderers as they deserved.
He settled Egypt and Armenia. He would have disposed of the Parthians had
not fresh seditions recalled him to Italy. He quelled those seditions. He
restored peace in Africa and Spain, and again his one desire was to spare
his fellow-citizens. There was in him an 'inbred goodness.'[3] He was
always the same--never carried away by anger, and never spoilt by success.
He did not retaliate for the past; he never tried by severity to secure
himself for the future. His effort throughout was to save all who would
allow themselves to be saved. He repaired old acts of injustice. He
restored the families of those who had been proscribed by Sylla, but he
burnt unread the correspondence of Pompey and Scipio, that those whom it
compromised might neither suffer injury nor fear injury. You honored him
as your father; you loved him as your benefactor; you made him chief of
the State, not being curious of titles, but regarding the most which you
could give as less than he had deserved at your hands. Toward the gods he
was High Priest. To you he was Consul; to the army he was Imperator; to
the enemies of his country, Dictator. In sum he was _Pater Patriae_.
And this your father, your Pontifex, this hero, whose person was declared
inviolable, lies dead--dead, not by disease or age, not by war or
visitation of God, but here at home, by conspiracy within your own walls,
slain in the Senate-house, the warrior unarmed, the peacemaker naked to
his foes, the righteous judge in the seat of judgment. He whom no foreign
enemy could hurt has been killed by his fellow-countrymen--he, who had so
often shown mercy, by those whom he had spared. Where, Caesar, is your
love for mankind? Where is the sacredness of your life? Where are your
laws? Here you lie murdered--here in the Forum, through which so often you
marched in triumph wreathed with garlands; here upon the Rostra from which
you were wont to address your people. Alas for your gray hairs dabbled in
blood! alas for this lacerated robe in which you were dressed for the
sacrifice!"[4]

Antony's words, as he well knew, were a declaration of irreconcilable war
against the murderers and their friends. As his impassioned language did
its work the multitude rose into fury. They cursed the conspirators. They
cursed the Senate who had sate by while the deed was being done. They had
been moved to fury by the murder of Clodius. Ten thousand Clodiuses, had
he been all which their imagination painted him, could not equal one
Caesar. They took on themselves the order of the funeral. They surrounded
the body, which was reverently raised by the officers of the Forum. Part
proposed to carry it to the Temple of Jupiter, in the Capitol, and to burn
it under the eyes of the assassins; part to take it into the Senate-house
and use the meeting-place of the Optimates a second time as the pyre of
the people's friend. A few legionaries, perhaps to spare the city a
general conflagration, advised that it should be consumed where it lay.
The platform was torn up and the broken timbers piled into a heap. Chairs
and benches were thrown on to it, the whole crowd rushing wildly to add a
chip or splinter. Actors flung in their dresses, musicians their
instruments, soldiers their swords. Women added their necklaces and
scarves. Mothers brought up their children to contribute toys and
playthings. On the pile so composed the body of Caesar was reduced to
ashes. The remains were collected with affectionate care and deposited in
the tomb of the Caesars, in the Campus Martius. The crowd, it was
observed, was composed largely of libertini and of provincials whom Caesar
had enfranchised. The demonstrations of sorrow were most remarkable among
the Jews, crowds of whom continued for many nights to collect and wail in
the Forum at the scene of the singular ceremony.

When the people were in such a mood, Rome was no place for the
conspirators. They scattered over the Empire; Decimus Brutus, Marcus
Brutus, Cassius, Cimber, Trebonius retreated to the provinces which Caesar
had assigned them, the rest clinging to the shelter of their friends. The
legions--a striking tribute to Roman discipline--remained by their eagles,
faithful to their immediate duties, and obedient to their officers, till
it could be seen how events would turn. Lepidus joined the army in Gaul;
Antony continued in Rome, holding the administration in his hands and
watching the action of the Senate. Caesar was dead. But Caesar still
lived. "It was not possible that the grave should hold him." The people
said that he was a god, and had gone back to heaven, where his star had
been seen ascending;[5] his spirit remained on earth, and the vain
blows of the assassins had been but "malicious mockery." "We have killed
the king," exclaimed Cicero in the bitterness of his disenchantment, "but
the kingdom is with us still;" "we have taken away the tyrant: the tyranny
survives." Caesar had not overthrown the oligarchy; their own incapacity,
their own selfishness, their own baseness had overthrown them. Caesar had
been but the reluctant instrument of the power which metes out to men the
inevitable penalties of their own misdeeds. They had dreamt that the
Constitution was a living force which would revive of itself as soon as
its enemy was gone. They did not know that it was dead already, and that
they had themselves destroyed it. The Constitution was but an agreement by
which the Roman people had consented to abide for their common good. It
had ceased to be for the common good. The experience of fifty miserable
years had proved that it meant the supremacy of the rich, maintained by
the bought votes of demoralized electors. The soil of Italy, the industry
and happiness of tens of millions of mankind, from the Rhine to the
Euphrates, had been the spoil of five hundred families and their relatives
and dependents, of men whose occupation was luxury, and whose appetites
were for monstrous pleasures. The self-respect of reasonable men could no
longer tolerate such a rule in Italy or out of it. In killing Caesar the
optimates had been as foolish as they were treacherous; for Caesar's
efforts had been to reform the Constitution, not to abolish it. The civil
war had risen from their dread of his second consulship, which they had
feared would make an end of their corruptions; and that the Constitution
should be purged of the poison in its veins was the sole condition on
which its continuance was possible. The obstinacy, the ferocity, the
treachery of the aristocracy had compelled Caesar to crush them; and the
more desperate their struggles the more absolute the necessity became. But
he alone could have restored as much of popular liberty as was consistent
with the responsibilities of such a government as the Empire required. In
Caesar alone were combined the intellect and the power necessary for such
a work; and they had killed him, and in doing so had passed final sentence
on themselves. Not as realities any more, but as harmless phantoms, the
forms of the old Republic were henceforth to persist. In the army only
remained the imperial consciousness of the honor and duty of Roman
citizens, To the army, therefore, the rule was transferred. The Roman
nation had grown as the oak grows, self-developed in severe morality, each
citizen a law to himself, and therefore capable of political freedom in an
unexampled degree. All organizations destined to endure spring from forces
inherent in themselves, and must grow freely, or they will not grow at
all. When the tree reaches maturity, decay sets in; if it be left
standing, the disintegration of the fibre goes swiftly forward; if the
stem is severed from the root, the destroying power is arrested, and the
timber will endure a thousand years. So it was with Rome. The Constitution
under which the Empire had sprung up was poisoned, and was brought to a
violent end before it had affected materially for evil the masses of the
people. The solid structure was preserved--not to grow any longer, not to
produce a new Camillus or a new Regulus, a new Scipio Africanus or a new
Tiberius Gracchus, but to form an endurable shelter for civilized mankind,
until a fresh spiritual life was developed out of Palestine to remodel the
conscience of humanity.

A gleam of hope opened to Cicero in the summer. Octavius, who was in
Greece at the time of the murder, came to Rome to claim his inheritance.
He was but eighteen, too young for the burden which was thrown upon him;
and being unknown, he had the confidence of the legions to win. The army,
dispersed over the provinces, had as yet no collective purpose. Antony, it
is possible, was jealous of him, and looked on himself as Caesar's true
representative and avenger. Octavius, finding Antony hostile, or at least
indifferent to his claims, played with the Senate with cool foresight till
he felt the ground firm under his feet. Cicero boasted that he would use
Octavius to ruin Antony, and would throw him over when he had served his
purpose. "Cicero will learn," Octavius said, when the words were reported
to him, "that I shall not be played with so easily."

[Sidenote: B.C. 44-43.]
[Sidenote: B.C. 43.]
For a year the confusion lasted; two of Caesar's officers, Hirtius and
Pausa, were chosen consuls by the senatorial party, to please the legions;
and Antony contended dubiously with them and Decimus Brutus for some
months in the North of Italy. But Antony joined Lepidus, and the Gallic
legions with judicial fitness brought Cicero's dreams to the ground.
Cicero's friend, Plancus, who commanded in Normandy and Belgium, attempted
a faint resistance, but was made to yield to the resolution of his troops.
Octavius and Antony came to an understanding; and Caesar's two generals,
who were true to his memory, and Octavius, who was the heir of his name,
crossed the Alps, at the head of the united army of Gaul, to punish the
murder and restore peace to the world. No resistance was possible. Many of
the senators, like Cicero, though they had borne no part in the
assassination, had taken the guilt of it upon themselves by the enthusiasm
of their approval. They were all men who had sworn fidelity to Caesar, and
had been ostentatious in their profession of devotion to him. It had
become too plain that from such persons no repentance was to be looked
for. They were impelled by a malice or a fanaticism which clemency could
not touch or reason influence. So long as they lived they would still
conspire; and any weapons, either of open war or secret treachery, would
seem justifiable to them in the cause which they regarded as sacred.
Caesar himself would, no doubt, have again pardoned them. Octavius,
Antony, and Lepidus were men of more common mould. The murderers of
Caesar, and those who had either instigated them secretly or applauded
them afterward, were included in a proscription list, drawn by retributive
justice on the model of Sylla's. Such of them as were in Italy were
immediately killed. Those in the provinces, as if with the curse of Cain
upon their heads, came one by one to miserable ends. Brutus and Cassius
fought hard and fell at Philippi. In three years the tyrannicides of the
ides of March, with their aiders and abettors, were all dead, some killed
in battle, some in prison, some dying by their own hand--slain with the
daggers with which they had stabbed their master.

Out of the whole party the fate of one only deserves special notice, a man
whose splendid talents have bought forgiveness for his faults, and have
given him a place in the small circle of the really great whose memory is
not allowed to die.

[Sidenote: Dec. 7, B.C. 43.]
After the dispersion of the conspirators which followed Caesar's funeral,
Cicero had remained in Rome. His timidity seemed to have forsaken him, and
he had striven, with an energy which recalled his brightest days, to set
the Constitution again upon its feet. Antony charged him in the Senate
with having been the contriver of Caesar's death. He replied with
invectives fierce and scurrilous as those which he had heaped upon
Catiline and Clodius. A time had been when he had affected to look on
Antony as his preserver. Now there was no imaginable infamy in which he
did not steep his name. He spoke of the murder as the most splendid
achievement recorded in history, and he regretted only that he had not
been taken into counsel by the deliverers of their country. Antony would
not then have been alive to rekindle civil discord. When Antony left Rome,
Cicero was for a few months again the head of the State. He ruled the
Senate, controlled the Treasury, corresponded with the conspirators in the
provinces, and advised their movements. He continued sanguine himself, and
he poured spirit into others. No one can refuse admiration to the last
blaze of his expiring powers. But when he heard that Antony and Lepidus
and Octavius had united, and were coming into Italy with the whole Western
army, he saw that all was over. He was now sixty-three--too old for hope.
He could hardly have wished to live, and this time he was well assured
that there would be no mercy for him. Caesar would have spared a man whom
he esteemed in spite of his infirmities. But there was no Caesar now, and
fair speeches would serve his turn no longer. He retired from the city
with his brother Quintus, and had some half-formed purpose of flying to
Brutus, who was still in arms in Macedonia. He even embarked, but without
a settled resolution, and he allowed himself to be driven back by a storm.
Theatrical even in extremities, he thought of returning to Rome and of
killing himself in Caesar's house, that he might bring the curse of his
blood upon Octavius. In these uncertainties he drifted into his own villa
at Formiae,[6] saying in weariness, and with a sad note of his old
self-importance, that he would die in the country which he had so often
saved. Here, on the 4th of December, B.C. 43, Popilius Loenas, an officer
of Antony's, came to find him. Peasants from the neighborhood brought news
to the villa that the soldiers were approaching. His servants thrust him
into a litter and carried him down through the woods toward the sea.
Loenas followed and overtook him. To his slaves he had been always the
gentlest of masters. They would have given their lives in his defence if
he would have allowed them; but he bade them set the litter down and save
themselves. He thrust out his head between the curtains, and it was
instantly struck off.

So ended Cicero, a tragic combination of magnificent talents, high
aspirations, and true desire to do right, with an infirmity of purpose and
a latent insincerity of character which neutralized and could almost make
us forget his nobler qualities. It cannot be said of Cicero that he was
blind to the faults of the party to which he attached himself. To him we
owe our knowledge of what the Roman aristocrats really were, and of the
hopelessness of expecting that they could have been trusted any longer
with the administration of the Empire, if the Empire itself was to endure.
Cicero's natural place was at Caesar's side; but to Caesar alone of his
contemporaries he was conscious of an inferiority which was intolerable to
him. In his own eyes he was always the first person. He had been made
unhappy by the thought that posterity might rate Pompey above himself.
Closer acquaintance had reassured him about Pompey, but in Caesar he was
conscious of a higher presence, and he rebelled against the humiliating
acknowledgment. Supreme as an orator he could always be, and an order of
things was, therefore, most desirable where oratory held the highest
place. Thus he chose his part with the "_boni_," whom he despised
while he supported them, drifting on through vacillation into treachery,
till "the ingredients of the poisoned chalice" were "commended to his own
lips."

In Cicero Nature half-made a great man and left him uncompleted. Our
characters are written in our forms, and the bust of Cicero is the key to
his history. The brow is broad and strong, the nose large, the lips
tightly compressed, the features lean and keen from restless intellectual
energy. The loose bending figure, the neck, too weak for the weight of the
head, explain the infirmity of will, the passion, the cunning, the vanity,
the absence of manliness and veracity. He was born into an age of violence
with which he was too feeble to contend. The gratitude of mankind for his
literary excellence will forever preserve his memory from too harsh a
judgment.


[1] _Philippic_ ii. 35.

[2] Abridged from Dion Cassius, who probably gives no more than the
    traditionary version of Cicero's words.

[3] [Greek: emphutos chraestotaes] are Dion Cassius's words. Antony's
    language was differently reported, and perhaps there was no literal
    record of it. Dion Cassius, however, can hardly have himself composed
    the version which he gives in his history, for he calls the speech as
    ill-timed as it was brilliant.

[4] Abridged from Dion Cassius. xliv. 36.

[5] "In deorum numerum relatus est non ore modo decernentium sed et
    persuasione vulgi."--_Suetonius_.

[6] Near Gaeta.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


It remains to offer a few general remarks on the person whose life and
actions I have endeavored to describe in the preceding pages.

In all conditions of human society distinguished men are the subjects of
legend; but the character of the legend varies with the disposition of the
time. In ages which we call heroic the saint works miracles, the warrior
performs exploits beyond the strength of natural man. In ages less
visionary which are given to ease and enjoyment the tendency is to bring a
great man down to the common level, and to discover or invent faults which
shall show that he is or was but a little man after all. Our vanity is
soothed by evidence that those who have eclipsed us in the race of life
are no better than ourselves, or in some respects are worse than
ourselves; and if to these general impulses be added political or personal
animosity, accusations of depravity are circulated as surely about such
men, and are credited as readily, as under other influences are the
marvellous achievements of a Cid or a St. Francis. In the present day we
reject miracles and prodigies; we are on our guard against the mythology
of hero worship, just as we disbelieve in the eminent superiority of any
one of our contemporaries to another. We look less curiously into the
mythology of scandal; we accept easily and willingly stories disparaging
to illustrious persons in history, because similar stories are told and
retold with so much confidence and fluency among the political adversaries
of those who have the misfortune to be their successful rivals. The
absurdity of a calumny may be as evident as the absurdity of a miracle;
the ground for belief may be no more than a lightness of mind, and a less
pardonable wish that it may be true. But the idle tale floats in society,
and by and by is written down in books and passes into the region of
established realities.

The tendency to idolize great men and the tendency to depreciate them
arises alike in emotion; but the slanders of disparagement are as truly
legends as the wonder-tales of saints and warriors; and anecdotes related
of Caesar at patrician dinner-parties at Rome as little deserve attention
as the information so freely given upon the habits of modern statesmen in
the _salons_ of London and Paris. They are read now by us in classic
Latin, but they were recorded by men who hated Caesar and hated all that
he had done; and that a poem has survived for two thousand years is no
evidence that the author of it, even though he might be a Catullus, was
uninfluenced by the common passions of humanity.

Caesar, it is allowed, had extraordinary talents, extraordinary energy,
and some commendable qualities; but he was, as the elder Curio said,
"omnium mulierum vir et omnium virorum mulier;" he had mistresses in every
country which he visited, and he had _liaisons_ with half the ladies
in Rome. That Caesar's morality was altogether superior to that of the
average of his contemporaries is in a high degree improbable. He was a man
of the world, peculiarly attractive to women, and likely to have been
attracted by them. On the other hand, the undiscriminating looseness
attributed to him would have been peculiarly degrading in a man whose
passions were so eminently under control, whose calmness was never known
to be discomposed, and who, in everything which he did, acted always with
deliberate will. Still worse would it be if, by his example, he made
ridiculous his own laws against adultery and indulged himself in vices
which he punished in others. What, then, is the evidence? The story of
Nicomedes may be passed over. All that is required on that subject has
been already said. It was never heard of before Caesar's consulship, and
the proofs are no more than the libels of Bibulus, the satire of Catullus,
and certain letters of Cicero's which were never published, but were
circulated privately in Roman aristocratic society.[1] A story is
suspicious which is first produced after twenty years in a moment of
political excitement. Caesar spoke of it with stern disgust. He replied to
Catullus with an invitation to dinner; otherwise he passed it over in
silence--the only answer which an honorable man could give. Suetonius
quotes a loose song sung by Caesar's soldiers at his triumph. We know in
what terms British sailors often speak of their favorite commanders.
Affection, when it expresses itself most emphatically, borrows the
language of its opposites. Who would dream of introducing into a serious
life of Nelson catches chanted in the forecastle of the "Victory"? But
which of the soldiers sang these verses? Does Suetonius mean that the army
sang them in chorus as they marched in procession? The very notion is
preposterous. It is proved that during Caesar's lifetime scandal was busy
with his name; and that it would be so busy, whether justified or not, is
certain from the nature of things. Cicero says that no public man in Rome
escaped from such imputations. He himself flung them broadcast, and they
were equally returned upon himself. The surprise is rather that Caesar's
name should have suffered so little, and that he should have been admitted
on reflection by Suetonius to have been comparatively free from the
abominable form of vice which was then so common.

As to his _liaisons_ with women, the handsome, brilliant Caesar,
surrounded by a halo of military glory, must have been a Paladin of
romance to any woman who had a capacity of admiration in her. His own
distaste for gluttony and hard drinking, and for the savage amusements in
which the male Romans so much delighted, may have made the society of
cultivated ladies more agreeable to him than that of men, and if he showed
any such preference the coarsest interpretation would be inevitably placed
upon it. These relations, perhaps, in so loose an age assumed occasionally
a more intimate form; but it is to be observed that the first public act
recorded of Caesar was his refusal to divorce his wife at Sylla's bidding;
that he was passionately attached to his sister; that his mother, Aurelia,
lived with him till she died, and that this mother was a Roman matron of
the strictest and severest type. Many names were mentioned in connection
with him, yet there is no record of any natural child save Brutus, and one
other whose claims were denied and disproved.

Two intrigues, it may be said, are beyond dispute. His connection with the
mother of Brutus was notorious. Cleopatra, in spite of Oppius, was living
with him in his house at the time of his murder. That it was so believed a
hundred years after his death is, of course, indisputable; but in both
these cases the story is entangled with legends which show how busily
imagination had been at work. Brutus was said to be Caesar's son, though
Caesar was but fifteen when he was born; and Brutus, though he had the
temper of an Orestes, was devotedly attached to his mother in spite of the
supposed adultery, and professed to have loved Caesar when he offered him
as a sacrifice to his country's liberty. Cleopatra is said to have joined
Caesar at Rome after his return from Spain, and to have resided openly
with him as his mistress. Supposing that she did come to Rome, it is still
certain that Calpurnia was in Caesar's house when he was killed. Cleopatra
must have been Calpurnia's guest as well as her husband's; and her
presence, however commented upon in society, could not possibly have borne
the avowed complexion which tradition assigned to it. On the other hand,
it is quite intelligible that the young Queen of Egypt, who owed her
position to Caesar, might have come, as other princes came, on a visit of
courtesy, and that Caesar after their acquaintance at Alexandria should
have invited her to stay with him. But was Cleopatra at Rome at all? The
only real evidence for her presence there is to be found in a few words of
Cicero: "Reginae fuga mihi non molesta."--"I am not sorry to hear of the
flight of the queen." [2] There is nothing to show that the "queen" was
the Egyptian queen. Granting that the word Egyptian is to be understood,
Cicero may have referred to Arsinoe, who was called Queen as well as her
sister, and had been sent to Rome to be shown at Caesar's triumph.

But enough and too much on this miserable subject. Men will continue to
form their opinions about it, not upon the evidence, but according to
their preconceived notions of what is probable or improbable. Ages of
progress and equality are as credulous of evil as ages of faith are
credulous of good, and reason will not modify convictions which do not
originate in reason.

Let us pass on to surer ground.

In person Caesar was tall and slight. His features were more refined than
was usual in Roman faces; the forehead was wide and high, the nose large
and thin, the lips full, the eyes dark gray like an eagle's, the neck
extremely thick and sinewy. His complexion was pale. His beard and
mustache were kept carefully shaved. His hair was short and naturally
scanty, falling off toward the end of his life and leaving him partially
bald. His voice, especially when he spoke in public, was high and shrill.
His health was uniformly strong until his last year, when he became
subject to epileptic fits. He was a great bather, and scrupulously clean
in all his habits, abstemious in his food, and careless in what it
consisted, rarely or never touching wine, and noting sobriety as the
highest of qualities when describing any new people. He was an athlete in
early life, admirable in all manly exercises, and especially in riding. In
Gaul, as has been said already, he rode a remarkable horse, which he had
bred himself, and which would let no one but Caesar mount him. From his
boyhood it was observed of him that he was the truest of friends, that he
avoided quarrels, and was most easily appeased when offended. In manner he
was quiet and gentlemanlike, with the natural courtesy of high-breeding.
On an occasion when he was dining somewhere the other guests found the oil
too rancid for them. Caesar took it without remark, to spare his
entertainer's feelings. When on a journey through a forest with his friend
Oppius, he came one night to a hut where there was a single bed. Oppius
being unwell, Caesar gave it up to him, and slept on the ground.

In his public character he may be regarded under three aspects, as a
politician, a soldier, and a man of letters.

Like Cicero, Caesar entered public life at the bar. He belonged by birth
to the popular party, but he showed no disposition, like the Gracchi, to
plunge into political agitation. His aims were practical. He made war only
upon injustice and oppression; and when he commenced as a pleader he was
noted for the energy with which he protected a client whom he believed to
have been wronged. At a later period, before he was praetor, he was
engaged in defending Masintha, a young Numidian prince, who had suffered
some injury from Hiempsal, the father of Juba. Juba himself came to Rome
on the occasion, bringing with him the means of influencing the judges
which Jugurtha had found so effective. Caesar in his indignation seized
Juba by the beard in the court; and when Masintha was sentenced to some
unjust penalty Caesar carried him off, concealed him in his house, and
took him to Spain in his carriage. When he rose into the Senate, his
powers as a speaker became strikingly remarkable. Cicero, who often heard
him, and was not a favorable judge, said that there was a pregnancy in his
sentences and a dignity in his manner which no orator in Rome could
approach. But he never spoke to court popularity; his aim from first to
last was better government, the prevention of bribery and extortion, and
the distribution among deserving citizens of some portion of the public
land which the rich were stealing. The Julian laws, which excited the
indignation of the aristocracy, had no other objects than these; and had
they been observed they would have saved the Constitution. The obstinacy
of faction and the civil war which grew out of it obliged him to extend
his horizon, to contemplate more radical reforms--a large extension of the
privileges of citizenship, with the introduction of the provincial
nobility into the Senate, and the transfer of the administration from the
Senate and annually elected magistrates to the permanent chief of the
army. But his objects throughout were purely practical. The purpose of
government he conceived to be the execution of justice; and a
constitutional liberty under which justice was made impossible did not
appear to him to be liberty at all.

The practicality which showed itself in his general aims appeared also in
his mode of working. Caesar, it was observed, when anything was to be
done, selected the man who was best able to do it, not caring particularly
who or what he might be in other respects. To this faculty of discerning
and choosing fit persons to execute his orders may be ascribed the
extraordinary success of his own provincial administration, the enthusiasm
which was felt for him in the North of Italy, and the perfect quiet of
Gaul after the completion of the conquest. Caesar did not crush the Gauls
under the weight of Italy. He took the best of them into the Roman
service, promoted them, led them to associate the interests of the Empire
with their personal advancement and the prosperity of their own people. No
act of Caesar's showed more sagacity then the introduction of Gallic
nobles into the Senate; none was more bitter to the Scipios and Metelli,
who were compelled to share their august privileges with these despised
barbarians.

It was by accident that Caesar took up the profession of a soldier; yet
perhaps no commander who ever lived showed greater military genius. The
conquest of Gaul was effected by a force numerically insignificant, which
was worked with the precision of a machine. The variety of uses to which
it was capable of being turned implied, in the first place, extraordinary
forethought in the selection of materials. Men whose nominal duty was
merely to fight were engineers, architects, mechanics of the highest
order. In a few hours they could extemporize an impregnable fortress on an
open hillside. They bridged the Rhine in a week. They built a fleet in a
month. The legions at Alesia held twice their number pinned within their
works, while they kept at bay the whole force of insurgent Gaul, entirely
by scientific superiority. The machine, which was thus perfect, was
composed of human beings who required supplies of tools, and arms, and
clothes, and food, and shelter, and for all these it depended on the
forethought of its commander. Maps there were none. Countries entirely
unknown had to be surveyed; routes had to be laid out; the depths and
courses of rivers, the character of mountain passes, had all to be
ascertained. Allies had to be found among tribes as yet unheard of.
Countless contingent difficulties had to be provided for, many of which
must necessarily arise, though the exact nature of them could not be
anticipated. When room for accidents is left open, accidents do not fail
to be heard of. Yet Caesar was never defeated when personally present,
save once at Gergovia, and once at Durazzo; and the failure at Gergovia
was caused by the revolt of the Aedui; and the manner in which the failure
at Durazzo was retrieved showed Caesar's greatness more than the most
brilliant of his victories. He was rash, but with a calculated rashness,
which the event never failed to justify. His greatest successes were due
to the rapidity of his movements, which brought him on the enemy before
they heard of his approach. He travelled sometimes a hundred miles a day,
reading or writing in his carriage, though countries without roads, and
crossing rivers without bridges. No obstacles stopped him when he had a
definite end in view. In battle he sometimes rode; but he was more often
on foot, bareheaded, and in a conspicuous dress, that he might be seen and
recognized. Again and again by his own efforts he recovered a day that was
half lost. He once seized a panic-stricken standard-bearer, turned him
round, and told him that he had mistaken the direction of the enemy. He
never misled his army as to an enemy's strength, or if he mis-stated their
numbers it was only to exaggerate. In Africa, before Thapsus, when his
officers were nervous at the reported approach of Juba, he called them
together and said briefly, "You will understand that within a day King
Juba will be here with the legions, thirty thousand horse, a hundred
thousand skirmishers, and three hundred elephants. You are not to think or
ask questions. I tell you the truth, and you must prepare for it. If any
of you are alarmed, I shall send you home."

Yet he was singularly careful of his soldiers. He allowed his legions
rest, though he allowed none to himself. He rarely fought a battle at a
disadvantage. He never exposed his men to unnecessary danger, and the loss
by wear and tear in the campaigns in Gaul was exceptionally and even
astonishingly slight. When a gallant action was performed, he knew by whom
it had been done, and every soldier, however humble, might feel assured
that if he deserved praise he would have it. The army was Caesar's family.
When Sabinus was cut off, he allowed his beard to grow, and he did not
shave it till the disaster was avenged. If Quintus Cicero had been his own
child, he could not have run greater personal risk to save him when shut
up at Charleroy. In discipline he was lenient to ordinary faults, and not
careful to make curious inquiries into such things. He liked his men to
enjoy themselves. Military mistakes in his officers too he always
endeavored to excuse, never blaming them for misfortunes, unless there had
been a defect of courage as well as judgment. Mutiny and desertion only he
never overlooked. And thus no general was ever more loved by, or had
greater power over, the army which served under him. He brought the
insurgent 10th legion into submission by a single word. When the civil war
began and Labienus left him, he told all his officers who had served under
Pompey that they were free to follow if they wished. Not another man
forsook him.

Suetonius says that he was rapacious, that he plundered tribes in Spain
who were allies of Rome, that he pillaged shrines and temples in Gaul, and
destroyed cities merely for spoil. He adds a story which Cicero would not
have left untold and uncommented on if he had been so fortunate as to hear
of it: that Caesar when first consul took three thousand pounds weight of
gold out of the Capitol and replaced it with gilded brass. A similar story
is told of the Cid and of other heroes of fiction. How came Cicero to be
ignorant of an act which, if done at all, was done under his own eyes?
When praetor Caesar brought back money from Spain to the treasury; but he
was never charged at the time with peculation or oppression there. In Gaul
the war paid its own expenses; but what temples were there in Gaul which
were worth spoiling? Of temples, he was, indeed, scrupulously careful.
Varro had taken gold from the Temple of Hercules at Cadiz. Caesar replaced
it. Metellus Scipio had threatened to plunder the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus. Caesar protected it. In Gaul the Druids were his best friends;
therefore he certainly had not outraged religion there; and the quiet of
the province during the civil war is a sufficient answer to the accusation
of gratuitous oppression.

The Gauls paid the expenses of their conquest in the prisoners taken in
battle, who were sold to the slave merchants; and this is the real blot on
Caesar's career. But the blot was not personally upon Caesar, but upon the
age in which he lived. The great Pomponius Atticus himself was a dealer in
human chattels. That prisoners of war should be sold as slaves was the law
of the time, accepted alike by victors and vanquished; and the crowds of
libertini who assisted at Caesar's funeral proved that he was not regarded
as the enemy of these unfortunates, but as their special friend.

His leniency to the Pompeian faction has already been spoken of
sufficiently. It may have been politic, but it arose also from the
disposition of the man. Cruelty originates in fear, and Caesar was too
indifferent to death to fear anything. So far as his public action was
concerned, he betrayed no passion save hatred of injustice; and he moved
through life calm and irresistible, like a force of nature.

Cicero has said of Caesar's oratory that he surpassed those who had
practised no other art. His praise of him as a man of letters is yet more
delicately and gracefully emphatic. Most of his writings are lost; but
there remain seven books of commentaries on the wars in Gaul (the eighth
was added by another hand), and three books upon the civil war, containing
an account of its causes and history. Of these it was that Cicero said, in
an admirable image, that fools might think to improve on them, but that no
wise man would try it; they were _nudi omni ornatu orationis, tanquam
veste detracta_--bare of ornament, the dress of style dispensed with,
like an undraped human figure perfect in all its lines as nature made it.
In his composition, as in his actions, Caesar is entirely simple. He
indulges in no images, no labored descriptions, no conventional
reflections. His art is unconscious, as the highest art always is. The
actual fact of things stands out as it really was, not as mechanically
photographed, but interpreted by the calmest intelligence, and described
with unexaggerated feeling. No military narrative has approached the
excellence of the history of the war in Gaul. Nothing is written down
which could be dispensed with; nothing important is left untold; while the
incidents themselves are set off by delicate and just observations on
human character. The story is rendered attractive by complimentary
anecdotes of persons; while details of the character and customs of an
unknown and remarkable people show the attention which Caesar was always
at leisure to bestow on anything which was worthy of interest, even when
he was surrounded with danger and difficulty. The books on the civil war
have the same simplicity and clearness, but a vein runs through them of
strong if subdued emotion. They contain the history of a great revolution
related by the principal actor in it; but no effort can be traced to set
his own side in a favorable light, or to abuse or depreciate his
adversaries. The coarse invectives which Cicero poured so freely upon
those who differed from him are conspicuously absent. Caesar does not
exult over his triumphs or parade the honesty of his motives. The facts
are left to tell their own story; and the gallantry and endurance of his
own troops are not related with more feeling than the contrast between the
confident hopes of the patrician leaders at Pharsalia and the luxury of
their camp with the overwhelming disaster which fell upon them. About
himself and his own exploits there is not one word of self-complacency or
self-admiration. In his writings, as in his life, Caesar is always the
same--direct, straightforward, unmoved save by occasional tenderness,
describing with unconscious simplicity how the work which had been forced
upon him was accomplished. He wrote with extreme rapidity in the intervals
of other labor; yet there is not a word misplaced, not a sign of haste
anywhere, save that the conclusion of the Gallic war was left to be
supplied by a weaker hand. The Commentaries, as an historical narrative,
are as far superior to any other Latin composition of the kind as the
person of Caesar himself stands out among the rest of his contemporaries.

His other compositions have perished, in consequence, perhaps, of the
unforgiving republican sentiment which revived among men of letters after
the death of Augustus--which rose to a height in the "Pharsalia" of
Lucan--and which leaves so visible a mark in the writings of Tacitus and
Suetonius. There was a book "De Analogia," written by Caesar after the
conference at Lucca, during the passage of the Alps. There was a book on
the Auspices, which, coming from the head of the Roman religion, would
have thrown a light much to be desired on this curious subject. In
practice Caesar treated the auguries with contempt. He carried his laws in
open disregard of them. He fought his battles careless whether the sacred
chickens would eat or the calves' livers were of the proper color. His own
account of such things in his capacity of Pontifex would have had a
singular interest.

From the time of his boyhood he kept a common-place book, in which he
entered down any valuable or witty sayings, inquiring carefully, as Cicero
takes pains to tell us, after any smart observation of his own. Niebuhr
remarks that no pointed sentences of Caesar's can have come down to us.
Perhaps he had no gift that way, and admired in others what he did not
possess.

He left in verse "an account of the stars"--some practical almanac,
probably, in a shape to be easily remembered; and there was a journal in
verse also, written on the return from Munda. Of all the lost writings,
however, the most to be regretted is the "Anti-Cato." After Cato's death
Cicero published a panegyric upon him. To praise Cato was to condemn
Caesar; and Caesar replied with a sketch of the Martyr of Utica as he had
himself known him. The pamphlet, had it survived, would have shown how far
Caesar was able to extend the forbearance so conspicuous in his other
writings to the most respectable and the most inveterate of his enemies.
The verdict of fact and the verdict of literature on the great controversy
between them have been summed up in the memorable line of Lucan--

    Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed victa Catoni.

Was Cato right, or were the gods right? Perhaps both. There is a legend
that at the death of Charles V. the accusing angel appeared in heaven with
a catalogue of deeds which no advocate could palliate--countries laid
desolate, cities sacked and burnt, lists of hundreds of thousands of
widows and children brought to misery by the political ambition of a
single man. The evil spirit demanded the offender's soul, and it seemed as
if mercy itself could not refuse him the award. But at the last moment the
Supreme Judge interfered. The Emperor, He said, had been sent into the
world at a peculiar time, for a peculiar purpose, and was not to be tried
by the ordinary rules. Titian has painted the scene: Charles kneeling
before the Throne, with the consciousness, as became him, of human
infirmities, written upon his countenance, yet neither afraid nor abject,
relying in absolute faith that the Judge of all mankind would do right.

Of Caesar, too, it may be said that he came into the world at a special
time and for a special object. The old religions were dead, from the
Pillars of Hercules to the Euphrates and the Nile, and the principles on
which human society had been constructed were dead also. There remained of
spiritual conviction only the common and human sense of justice and
morality; and out of this sense some ordered system of government had to
be constructed, under which quiet men could live and labor and eat the
fruit of their industry. Under a rule of this material kind there can be
no enthusiasm, no chivalry, no saintly aspirations, no patriotism of the
heroic type. It was not to last forever. A new life was about to dawn for
mankind. Poetry, and faith, and devotion were to spring again out of the
seeds which were sleeping in the heart of humanity. But the life which is
to endure grows slowly; and as the soil must be prepared before the wheat
can be sown, so before the Kingdom of Heaven could throw up its shoots
there was needed a kingdom of this world where the nations were neither
torn in pieces by violence nor were rushing after false ideals and
spurious ambitions. Such a kingdom was the Empire of the Caesars--a
kingdom where peaceful men could work, think, and speak as they pleased,
and travel freely among provinces ruled for the most part by Gallios, who
protected life and property, and forbade fanatics to tear each other in
pieces for their religious opinions. "It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death," was the complaint of the Jewish priests to the Roman
governor. Had Europe and Asia been covered with independent nations, each
with a local religion represented in its ruling powers, Christianity must
have been stifled in its cradle. If St. Paul had escaped the Sanhedrim at
Jerusalem, he would have been torn to pieces by the silver-smiths at
Ephesus. The appeal to Caesar's judgment-seat was the shield of his
mission, and alone made possible his success.

And this spirit, which confined government to its simplest duties, while
it left opinion unfettered, was especially present in Julius Caesar
himself. From cant of all kinds he was totally free. He was a friend of
the people, but he indulged in no enthusiasm for liberty. He never dilated
on the beauties of virtue, or complimented, as Cicero did, a Providence in
which he did not believe. He was too sincere to stoop to unreality. He
held to the facts of this life and to his own convictions; and as he found
no reason for supposing that there was a life beyond the grave he did not
pretend to expect it. He respected the religion of the Roman State as an
institution established by the laws. He encouraged or left unmolested the
creeds and practices of the uncounted sects or tribes who were gathered
under the eagles. But his own writings contain nothing to indicate that he
himself had any religious belief at all. He saw no evidence that the gods
practically interfered in human affairs. He never pretended that Jupiter
was on his side. He thanked his soldiers after a victory, but he did not
order _Te Deums _to be sung for it; and in the absence of these
conventionalisms he perhaps showed more real reverence than he could have
displayed by the freest use of the formulas of pietism.

He fought his battles to establish some tolerable degree of justice in the
government of this world; and he succeeded, though he was murdered for
doing it.

Strange and startling resemblance between the fate of the founder of the
kingdom of this world and of the Founder of the kingdom not of this world,
for which the first was a preparation. Each was denounced for making
himself a king. Each was maligned as the friend of publicans and sinners;
each was betrayed by those whom he had loved and cared for; each was put
to death; and Caesar also was believed to have risen again and ascended
into heaven and become a divine being.


[1] Suetonius, _Julius Caesar_, 49.

[2] _To Atticus_, xiv. 8.






[Illustration: GALLIA in the time of Caesar]


Transcriber's note: A sidenote in chapter nine gives Caesar's age as 32
in B.C. 77. I have corrected this evident misprint to 23.






End of Project Gutenberg's Caesar: A Sketch, by James Anthony Froude

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAESAR: A SKETCH ***

This file should be named 7cesr10.txt or 7cesr10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 7cesr11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 7cesr10a.txt

Produced by Eric Eldred, Robert Connal
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

